Itti-Marduk-balāṭu, king of kings, favourite of the gods, son of Marduk-kabit-aḫḫēšu, (5) pious (and) perfect prince, viceroy of Babylon, who was chosen by the gods Anu and Dagan, (10) vice-regent for the god Enlil and the goddess Ninlil, mighty king, king of Sumer (and) Akkad,
for the god/goddess ... ... ...
(Property) of Ninurta-nādin-šumi, king of the world,
king of Babylon, king of Sumer (and) Akkad.
Nebuchadnezzar, pious prince, (...) for whom
the god Marduk, hero among the gods, decreed a fate without equal,
humble, who reveres the great gods (...),
submissive, prayerful, (...),
true shepherd, who provides for the cult centres,
king of justice, king of Babylon (...):
for the god Adad, the powerful lord ...,
almighty, foremost, sovereign (...),
my lord at whose mighty battle-cry ...,
the sound of whose roar on high is pleasant ... ...,
lord of Enamḫe (“House of Plenty”), who dwells in Ekitušḫegaltila (...),
who makes me triumph, my helper (...)
... ... enemy.
... I smote and
... ... I established.
(...) I cut off ... from the land of Sumer and Akkad.
... ...
... my heart.
... ...
because in the place of battle, strife, (and) fighting (...)
at the clash of arms and the revealing of the standard, the great god going forth (...).
Help me! Come to my side! ... ...
By his reliable positive answer ...
fire ...
his weapon ... ...
... ...
Nebuchadnezzar ...
in the place of fighting ...
On account of this ...
Ekitušḫegaltila ...
... ...
... ...
For the god Enlil, lord of lands, his lord: Nebuchadnezzar, (5) prayerful prince, made baked bricks and built the base of the Unu-maḫ (with them).
(Property) of Nebuchadnezzar, king of the world,
king of Babylon, king of Sumer (and) Akkad.
O god Marduk, you are able to rescue the prayerful man (and) to make the one who is assiduous toward your sanctuaries stand (in victory) over (his) enemies.
Your breeze wafted to me; I am able to throw down my enemies.
Strengthen my weapons so that I may overthrow my foes!
(Property) of Nebuchadnezzar, king of the world.
In Babylon dwells Nebuchadnezzar, the king. He rages like a lion (and) thunders like the god Adad. Like a lion, he frightens his distinguished nobles. His supplications go to the god Marduk, lord of Babylon:
“Have pity on me, one who is dejected and prostrate! Have pity on my land, which weeps and mourns! Have pity on my people, who wail and weep! O lord of Babylon, how long will you dwell in the land of the enemy? May beautiful Babylon be remembered by you! Turn your face back to Esagila (“House Whose Top Is High”), which you love!”
The lord of Babylon listened to the supplication(s) of Nebuchadnezzar and his command comes down to him from heaven:
“... by (my own) mouth I spoke to you. Instructions (promising) good fortune, I have sent to you. With my support you are to attack the land of Amurru. ... listen to the issuing of your instructions! ... take me from Elam to Babylon! Let me, ... the lord of Babylon, give Elam to you! ... above and below.”
... has seized (...) his gods ...
... Akkad, written (and) collated (from) a copy (in) Babylon.
... king of the world, king of Assyria.
... ... ... ...
He (Šutruk-nanḫundi) drove away the king Zababa-šuma-iddina (and) did away with his reign.
... his son Kudur-nanḫundi.
This king, whose offence exceeded those of his (fore)fathers (and) whose grievous crime was greater than (theirs), plotted evil against the land of Akkad (and) fabricated evil reports.
... Enlil-nādin-aḫi, a king who preceded me, who ... established enmity ... (and) spoke of ... ... and he (Kudur-nanḫundi) overwhelmed all the people of the land of Akkad like a flood.
He turned all their august cult centres into ruins.
He made the god Marduk, the great lord, rise from his ... seat.
He took to Elam as booty the ... of Sumer and Akkad.
... he led Enlil-nādin-aḫi away to Elam, ... him, (and) did away with his reign.
... not a native of Babylon, (but rather) a foe ...
... his ...
... (divine) punishment ...
... ... ... 
... ... ...
... ... ...
... who was terror-stricken, took to the mountains.
... ... harassed his enemy.
They observed the omens concerning him (and) sought the judgment of the god Marduk.
... worried, harassed, (and) perturbed, I said (to myself):
“ Unlike my predecessor who flourished in Elam, let me die this very day! ... (from) battle with him, let me not turn back!”
... with the remainder of (my) people I waited for him at the head of the Uqnû (River) and did not turn (back).
Against the will of the gods, the god Erra, (most) powerful of the gods, smote my warriors.
The enfeebling ... bound my team (of horses).
... ... the kattillu-demon was killing my thoroughbred horses.
I was afraid of death. I did not advance into battle (but rather) turned back.
... were heavy and I sat benumbed at the town Kār-Dūr-Apil-Sîn.
The Elamite advanced and I withdrew before him.
I lay on a bed of depression (and) sighs, (praying):
“... me that I ... before him!
... do not release the bonds of the gates!
... may his enemy enter!
... one who endures evil.
... by the word(s) of my lips.
... ... and may the heart of the god Enlil be appeased!
... may his emotions be soothed!”
... turmoil
... ...
To the people of Babylon, privileged people, members of the expert professions, those who are knowledgeable (and) wise, ... ... merchants (lit. “those who carry money-bags”) (and) commercial agents, (all) those of Babylon, (both) great and small, say (the following):
“ Thus (says) Nebuchadnezzar, viceroy for the god Enlil, a descendant of (a native family of) Babylon, the king your lord:
‘ The following (is to be used) for the stela:
(...) With regard to the great lord, the god Marduk, who has been angry with all the cult centres for a long time, ... you should know (that) he has relented and taken pity on Babylon. He summoned me to Esagila, the awe-inspiring sanctuary, and he gave me a magnificent commission. He told me to go by road (and) path on campaign to the land of Elam.
Anxiously, I concerned myself with the command of the great lord, the god Marduk. I assembled the troops of the gods Enlil, Šamaš, and Marduk and ... had them take the road to the land of Elam. They travelled distant paths (and) traversed waterless routes by night (and) day.
... at the Ulāia River, the wicked enemy, the Elamite, kept guard over the watering places. ... troops ... traversed. I did not give (them) water to drink or allow them (time) to recover from their fatigue. ... ... I hastened to go forth against him. The weapons ... for war. By the strength (granted me) by the god Enlil ... could not have ...; the king of the land of Elam held back. (20) His defeat was accomplished; his ... were scattered; (and) his assembled (forces) were dispersed. He abandoned his troops and crossed his rivers. He was benumbed ... I destroyed his country. He abandoned his strong cities (...) (and) disappeared.
I hastened on and ... saw the god Marduk, the exalted hero of the gods. Moreover, the gods of the land ... who had ordered ..., were seen with him. I took heart ... I was awe-struck. I let forth uncontrolled wailing. I grasped the hand of the great lord, the god Marduk, and caused him to take the road towards his (own) country.
The property of the temple, the dwelling ... extensive. Moreover, ... ... I saw. ... ... countless ... was indeed weighty and ... ... road (rev. 5) ... ... ... his face ... ... his property ... ... the god Bēl ... as delight ... gold, the property of Babylon, ... ... to (...) Esagila (rev. 10) ... ... food-offerings in the future. ... you should return (it) to its place. ... ... set up a (commemorative) tablet! ... do not destroy their ...! ... revere their position! (rev. 15) ... ... quickly ... ... ... to go ... ... may he put an end to his life!’”
... message which he sent from the land of Elam to the people of Babylon.
The praise of ... whose (the god Marduk’s) might (is) over the world forever,
Whose anger is grievous, but whose relenting is sweet, glorious for praise.
(He is the one) in whose power it is to make (a region) desolate and to resettle (it), (and who) shows future people how to watch for his sign.
(With regard to) Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, who administers correctly all the cult centres (and) confirms the regular offerings,
He (Marduk) made his wisdom splendid, extolled his power and made him supreme;
He made his ... great (...) and exalted his destined greatness.
Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, who administers correctly all the cult centres (and) confirms the regular offerings,
Distant descendant of kingship, seed preserved since before the flood,
Offspring of Enmeduranki, king of Sippar, who set up the pure bowl (and) took up the cedar-wood,
Who sat in the presence of the gods Šamaš and Adad, the divine judges,
Foremost son of Ninurta-nādin-šumi, the just king (and) true shepherd, who makes the foundations of the land firm,
Principal support of the god Adad and the goddess Gula, the supreme gods, scion of Nippur, one of ancient stock,
First attendant of the goddess Šuzianna, favourite sister of (the god) Anšar,
The one chosen by the gods Anu and Dagan, (and) selected by the steadfast hearts of the great gods, I —
At that time, in the reign of a previous king, the portents changed.
Good departed and evil was constant.
The lord (Marduk) became angry and (full of) wrath.
He commanded and the land was abandoned by its gods. The thinking of its people changed; they were incited to treachery.
The guardians of peace became angry and went up to the dome of heaven; the protective spirit of justice stood aside.
The god ..., who guards living creatures, abandoned the people; they all became like those who have no god.
Evil demons filled the land; merciless namtaru-demons entered the cult centres.
The land diminished; its thinking changed.
(With regard to) the wicked Elamite, who did not esteem its treasures, ... his battle (and) his attack were swift.
He laid waste the settlements (and) turned (the land) into a desert. He carried off the gods (and) turned the sanctuaries into ruins.
The god Marduk, king of the gods, who determines the fates, ... the lands, observed everything.
When the lord (Marduk) is angry, the Igīgū gods in heaven cannot endure his arrogance.
His fearsome splendour is terrifying; at his angry look no man can stand.
The earth did not support his tread nor ...; at his roaring the seas are agitated.
The rocky mountains did not sustain his foot-step; the gods of the universe are submissive to him.
Things of every kind are entrusted to his control. (...) When he has become angry, who can appease him?
... who learned ... him and see his skilful work
... himself ... the Enlil of the gods, the capable,
... the Igīgū gods ..., judicious prince,
... who in ... adorned with awe-inspiring radiance, seated in awesome splendour,
The mighty one ... whose lordship excels.
(His) skilfulness ... let me praise ...
First tablet (...) Palace of Ashurbanipal, king of the world, king of Assyria, the one on whom the god Nabû and the goddess Tašmētu bestowed broad understanding, who has sharp eyes (and who learned) the highest level of scribal art, that skill which no one among the kings who had preceded me had learned. I have written on tablets, checked (and) collated everything pertaining to cuneiform signs, the art of the god Nabû. I set (them) up in my palace so that they might be seen and read to me.
... the Igīgū gods ...
... is broad ...
... front ...
... mention of whom is pleasant ...
... who to the limit(s) of heaven and netherworld ...
Who makes opposing forces agree, ... ...
The holy god, who alone is splendid ...
The merciful, who preserves the weak ...
No translation warranted.
... fled, the arms of all those whom the weapon(s) touched became stiff of their own accord, like (the arms of) those who died of cold; their bodies lay sprawled out.
He (the god Marduk) caused ... to pass above and below (the land), to the right and the left, in front and behind, like the (very) flood. He filled the inner city, the suburbs, the steppe, (and) the plain with deathly silence and turned it into a desert.
(...), the servant who reveres him, prayerful, obedient, who is constantly attentive for his (Marduk’s) appearance, did not cease praying until he (Marduk) had made him obtain his heart’s desire.
Until I had regarded his lofty figure, so long as dejectedness of heart — (which afflicted me) daily without end — had not left my body, I did not get enough sleep in the sweet lap of night.
Upon my piteous entreaties, my ardent prayers, my supplication(s), and my expression(s) of humility by which I daily besought him (and) prayed to him, in his generous heart he had pity and turned back unto the holy city.
Having made up his mind, when he went out from the wickness in Elam, going by (way of) city (and) steppe, he took a road of jubilation, a path of rejoicing, a route (indicating his) attention (to) and acceptance (of my prayers), unto Šuanna (Babylon).
The people of the land regarded his lofty, fitting, majestic, bright (and) joyful appearance; all of them paid attention to him.
The lord entered and took up his peaceful abode.
Kasulim (“Gate of Radiance”), his lordly shrine, became bright, filled with rejoicing.
The heavens (brought him) their abundance, the earth its yield, the sea its wealth, (and) the mountain its gift.
(People) of all different languages bless him who has no rival.
They brought their weighty tribute to the lord of lords.
Fine sheep were slaughtered (and) prime bulls (provided) in abundance. Food offerings were lavish (and) incense was burnt.
The armannu-aromatic gave off a sweet fragrance.
A sacrifice ... was made; (the place) was full of rejoicing.
... ... a celebration took place.
The gods of heaven and earth were looking at the valiant god Marduk with joyful pleasure.
... the praise of (his) valour.
... makes brilliant the alû-drum and the lilissu-drum.
(... tablet ...) Palace of Ashurbanipal, king of the world, king of Assyria,
the one on whom the god Nabû and the goddess Tašmētu bestowed broad understanding, who has sharp eyes (and who learned) the highest level of scribal art,
that skill which no one among the kings who had preceded me had learned. I have written on tablets, checked, (and) collated everything pertaining to cuneiform signs, the art of the god Nabû. I set (them) up in my palace so that they might be seen and read to me.
... ... ...
(Palace of) Ashurbanipal, king of the world, king of Assyria.
The one who administers correctly (all) regions (of the world) (...),
The tireless one, who watches over all of heaven and netherworld ...
The lord, whose shining light covers mountain and sea,
And whose awe-inspiring sheen covers the widespread world,
The noble one at whose utterance the Igīgū gods pay attention,
And at the issuing of whose command the Anunnakū gods take fright (...), presenting themselves on their knees (lit. “stand kneeling”),
The august judge, who makes decisions for god and goddess,
The one who dwells in Ebabbar (“Shining House”), the one on whom his fathers rely —
At that time, a royal descendant, one of an enduring lineage, scion of Šuanna (Babylon),
Wise viceroy, reverent, prayerful, one who makes his (the Sun-god’s) heart glad,
Because the king constantly besought the Sun-god, the light of the gods, with supplication(s) and prayer(s),
He (the Sun-god) looked happily (upon him) and gave him the kingship of all people (and) of every region (of the world).
He granted him a just sceptre, an eternal throne, (and) a reign of long duration.
He gave orders to him to plunder the land of Elam and he ...
He had been brought to the land of Elam; he turned it back (and) inflicted a defeat upon it.
The great gods who had become angry with the land of Akkad (and) had gone to the land of Elam
... ... ...
... over the regions (of the world) ...
May his reign be made great and may it be securely established forever in the land of Sumer and Akkad!
When, (with regard to) Nebuchadnezzar — the pious (and) pre-eminent prince, offspring of Babylon, sovereign of kings, valiant vice-regent, viceroy of Babylon, the sun-god of his land, who makes his people flourish, (i 5) who protects the boundaries, who confirms the border lines, just king who renders righteous decisions, valiant male whose strength is directed towards doing battle, who bears a terrible bow, who does not fear battle, who overpowered the mighty Lullubû land with (his) weapon(s), (i 10) defeated the Amorite land (and) plundered the Kassites, pre-eminent among kings, prince beloved of the god Marduk — the king of the gods, the god Marduk, commissioned him (Nebuchadnezzar), he raised his weapons in order to avenge the land of Akkad.
From the city Dēr, the cult centre of the god Anum, he made an incursion to (a distance of) thirty leagues. In the month of Duʾūzu he set out on campaign. During the whole time (of the campaign) the blistering heat burnt like fire and the (very) roadways scorched like flames. There was no water in the places which were (normally) waterlogged and the drinking places were cut off. (i 20) The best of the great horses gave out (lit. “stood”) and the legs of the strong warrior sought for a respite (lit. “turned”). (Yet) the king, the pre-eminent one, goes on, the gods supporting him. Nebuchadnezzar proceeds on; he has no equal. He does not fear the difficult terrain; he (even) increases the daily march.
Šitti-Marduk, the head of the house of Bīt-Karziabku, whose chariot was (stationed) on the right flank of the king, his lord, did not lag far behind, but (rather) kept his chariot ready. The mighty king hastened on and came to the bank of the Ulāia River. The two kings came together, engaging in battle. (i 30) Fire flared up between them. The face of the sun was darkened by the dust (they raised up). Dust storms whirled; the storm whipped around. In the storm of their battle, the warrior in (his) chariot could not see the second man (in the chariot) with him.
Šitti-Marduk, the head of the house of Bīt-Karziabku, whose chariot was (stationed) on the right flank of the king, his lord, did not lag far behind, but (rather) kept his chariot ready. He did not fear the battle, but (rather) went down against the enemy. Moreover, he penetrated deep into (the midst of) the enemy of his lord. (i 40) By the command of the goddess Ištar and the god Adad, the gods (who are) the lords of battle, he put Ḫulteludiš, the king of Elam, to flight (and) he (Ḫulteludiš) disappeared. Thus, king Nebuchadnezzar stood in triumph; he seized the land of Elam (and) plundered its property.
(Property) of Enlil-nādin-apli, king of the world, king of Babylon, king of Sumer (and) Akkad.
For the god Nanna, his lord: Marduk-nādin-aḫḫē, king of the world, king of Ur, (5) king of Babylon, king of Sumer (and) Akkad, who provides for Ur, restorer of Ekišnugal, (re)built (and) restored Eganunmaḫ, (10) the temple which had collapsed due to old age, (and) dedicated to him (this) door socket, the name of whose stone is ‟ It shines. ”
For the god Nanna,
lord of the foundation of heaven (and) netherworld,
noble ...,
great light,
...,
king ...,
his lord:
Marduk-nādin-aḫḫē,
pious prince,
...,
shepherd ...,
the lord fitted for the god EN.DIŠ.DIŠ,
lord ... of Ur,
...,
king ...,
king ...,
king of Sumer (and) Akkad,
king of the four quarters (of the world),
whose deeds are pleasing to the god Sîn (and) the great gods, ...
Sumer (and) Akkad, ...
At that time,
the great oven of the shrine of the god Sîn,
where all the morning and evening meals of the gods ...
the great oven,
its great roaring inside it ...
On account of this,
... may the god Sîn,
... lord
... kingship ...
grant to Marduk-nādin-aḫḫē,
his obedient prince,
the shepherd who restores ...
a long life-span
(and) a reign ...!
(Property) of Marduk-nādin-aḫḫē, king of the world, son of Ninurta-nādin-šumi, king of Babylon.
(Property) of Marduk-nādin-aḫḫē, king of the world, king of Babylon, king of Sumer (and) Akkad.
(Property) of Šamaš-killanni, the ša rēši of the king.
Marduk-šāpik-zēri,
king of Babylon,
mighty king,
king of the world,
king of the four quarters (of the world),
... ...
Babylon, ...
I/he made suitable
for the goddess Ištar
and
the goddess Innina —
humble, respectful,
and
king of Babylon
when ...
lord ...
Euphrates river
inside
Babylon,
I/he strengthened the gates and ...
the (city) wall Imgur-Enlil,
the wall ...
... ...
For the god Mudugasâ, ... of the gods, heir of the god Lugaldimmeranki, (5) lion of Esagila and Ezida, lord of Borsippa, who dwells in Ezida, his lord:
Marduk-šāpik-zēri, I, the one called by him (the god), the prince to whom he stretched out his hand, (re)constructed and restored the base of Ezida, which had collapsed due to old age.
Written and collated according to its original.
Tablet of Nabû-šumu-līšir, descendant of Ḫuṣābu.
Month of Nisannu, fifteenth year of Kandalānu, king of Babylon.
(Property) of Marduk-šāpik-zēri,
king of the world.
Stone weight, (weighing) ten minas.
Napsameni, overseer of the diviners, nešakku-official of the god Enlil, servant of Marduk-šāpik-zēri, king of Babylon.
Adad-apla-iddina, king of Babylon, ... the (city) wall Imgur-Enlil.
Adad-apla-iddina, king of Babylon, legitimate heir of/who(m) ...
(Not sufficiently preserved to allow translation.)
To Marduk, lord of Babylon, lord of Esagila, his august helper, (5) his lord: Adad-apla-iddina, king of Babylon, presented (this object) for the sake of his life.
Adad-apla-iddina, king of Babylon, made Emeteursaga (“House Worthy of the Hero”) shine. The god Zababa ...
For the supreme vizier, dragon without equal, ... sublime ...
Offspring of the god Dumu-duku, perfect heir, honoured son, offspring of the goddess Erua,
The one who has gathered to himself (all) rites and ordinances, who makes secure the throne, the sceptre of the people,
Who establishes a reign, who decrees kingship, the lord of Borsippa who dwells in Ezida,
His helper, his august protector, who makes him triumph, his lord:
Adad-apla-iddina, king of Babylon, prince who reveres him,
To (obtain) what he strives for, ... his desire, to experience the fullness of old age,
... his aid ... to intercede ...
A belt of red gold which is duly adorned with valuable stone(s)
And (decorated with depictions of) rampant bulls standing upon it facing the four directions
He had made and presented (to the god) to be an ornament for his braided belt.
Eleven are its lines. That which is (written) upon the belt of the lord of Borsippa.
Written (and) collated according to its original.
Written according to the wording of damaged tablets. Anyone who sees (this) should not damage (it)! (Instead), let him restore the break(s)!
Tablet of Urad-Gula, the exorcist, son of Adad-šuma-uṣur, chief exorcist of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria.
Adad-apla-iddina, king of Babylon, builder of (5) Nēmet-Marduk (“Bulwark of the God Marduk”), the outer wall of the (city) wall of Nippur, for the god Enlil, his lord.
For the goddess Ninisina, wisest of the gods, his lady: (5) Adad-apla-iddina, king of Babylon, son of ..., renovated (10) Egalmaḫ (“Exalted Palace”), her beloved shrine.
Adad-apla-iddina, king of Babylon, presented ... its great shrine;
for the future ... ...
Adad-apla-iddina, king of Babylon, (5) ... of the god Šamaš, built the (enclosure) wall of the temple Ebabbar (“Shining House”), the abode of prayer.
Adad-apla-iddina, son of the goddess Ninisina, king of Babylon, (5) son-in-law of the divine (moon) crescent, the one who provides for Ur, renovated Egišnugal (10) for the god AŠimbabbar, his lord.
Adad-apla-iddina, son of the goddess Ninisina, king of Babylon, (5) son-in-law of the god Nanna, the one who provides for Ur (and) renovated (10) Egišnugal for the god AŠimbabbar, his lord.
(Property) of Adad-apla-iddina, king of the world.
Adad-apla-iddina
(Too poorly preserved to allow translation.)
I am the one who takes in his (lit. “my”) hand the lead rope of all the people.
At that time, with regard to the god Asari, the one who goes at the fore, I respectfully followed his desires.
In order to re-erect the wall Imgur-Enlil (“The God Enlil Showed Favour”), the (city) wall of Babylon, which had collapsed at the beginning of the year due to old age, to reach its ancient foundation, to lay its foundation on the breast of the netherworld, and to restore it (ii 15) as it had been in the past,
... the king ...
... may he not change.
... my statue I put with it.
Thirty minas, correct (weight).
(Property) of Nabû-šumu-libūr, king of the world.
No translation warrranted.
No translation warranted.
For the god Enlil, supreme lord, exalted, king of the universe, august leader, sovereign of heaven and netherworld, who decides the fates, venerable, splendid, whose rulership cannot be equaled among all the gods, king of the gods, lord of the whole expanse of the heavens, at whose utterance all the Igīgū gods moan in fear (5) and at the giving of whose order(s) all the Anunnakū gods shake like reeds, lord of Ekur and Nippur, who dwells in Ekurigigal, his lord:
Simbar-Šipak, just king, (his) respectful servant, who administers correctly the rites of the gods Anu and Dagan (and) duly performs their cultic rites,
(With regard to) the throne of the god Enlil in Ekurigigal which Nebuchadnezzar (I), a previous king, had made — during the reign of Adad-apla-iddina, king of Babylon, hostile Arameans and Sutians, enemies of Ekur and Nippur, who desecrated Duranki, upset in Sippar — the ancient city (and) abode of the great judge of the gods — their cultic rites, plundered the land of Sumer and Akkad, (and) overthrew all the temples.
The goods (and) property of the god Enlil which the Arameans had carried off and (which) the Subartu had (subsequently) taken (from them), at the command of the god Enlil — exalted ruler of the gods, lord of lords — the god Marduk — king of the universe, who has the power to make (a region) desolate and to resettle (it) — (and) the god Utulu — terror of (his) enemies, slayer of (his) foes — an Assyrian recognized the goods (and) property of the god Enlil and brought (them) into Baltil (Aššur). It returned from Baltil to its place in Duranki.
Simbar-Šipak, viceroy for the god Enlil, wise, beloved of the god ..., reverent shepherd, who is assiduous toward the sanctuaries of the god Enlil, the knowledgeable one, was exceedingly concerned about the renovation of Ekur and Nippur.
He had constructed and set up a throne (made) of mēsu-wood — the durable wood — whose mountings were made of ṣāriru-gold and whose form was extra large, (in sum, a throne) suitable for his (Enlil’s) august position as supreme god.
On account of this, when the god Marduk — the great lord, Enlil of the gods, supreme (deity) — sits upon this throne, may the fate of Simbar-Šipak — just king, shepherd, (and) his (the god Marduk’s) favorite — be established favorably.
Written and collated according to its original. (By) the hand of Marduk-šarrani, son of Rīmūt-Nabû, son of Lūṣi-ana-nūr-Irra, descendant of Sîn-leqe-unnēnī, the lamentation-priest of the goddesses Ištar of Uruk and Nanāia, one privileged to enter the temple of the goddess Kanisurra, scribe of Eanna.
Tablet of Rīmūt-Nabû, descendant of Sîn-leqe-unnēnī, the lamentation-priest of the goddesses Ištar of Uruk and Nanāia, one privileged to enter the temple of the goddess Kanisurra.
Written in the month Kislīmu, on the first day.
That which is (written) upon the throne at Nippur (...).
(Property) of Simbar-Šipak, son of Erība-Sîn.
(Property) of Kaššû-nādin-aḫḫē, king of the world.
(Property) of Simbar-Šipak, king of the world.
(Property) of Eulmaš-šākin-šumi, king of the world.
(Property) of Eulmaš-šākin-šumi, king of the world.
1–2) (Property) of Ninurta-kudurrī-uṣur, king of the world.
(A field of) twelve (kurru) at the ratio of three sūtu of seed per iku (measured by) the large cubit, in the cultivable area of ...-Adad, (in the region of) Uruk, on the bank of the royal canal, in the province of the Sea(land): upper length, to the north, next to the royal canal; (5) lower length, to the south, next to the sanctuary; upper width, to the west, next to the canal of the goddess Gula; (and) lower width, to the east, next to the canal of the god Ea —
Kaššû-bēl-zēri, son of Aḫu-bani, the governor of the Sealand, presented (this land) to the goddess Uṣur-amāssu, who dwells in Uruk, his lady, in order to prolong his days, to ensure the well-being of his offspring, and so that he might live in safety in the presence of his king.
That which is (written) upon a seal which is on the necklace of the goddess Uṣur-amāssu.
Ninurta-ušallim, son of a šangû-priest ... governor of Babylon.
...-Marduk, the provincial governor.
Esarhaddon, great king, mighty king, king of the world, (i 5) king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of Sumer and Akkad, true shepherd, favorite of the lord of lords, pious prince, (i 10) beloved of the goddess Zarpanītu — the queen, the goddess of the entire universe — reverent king who from the days of his childhood (i 15) was attentive to their rule and praised their valor, pious slave, humble, submissive, the one who reveres their great divinity —
At that time, in the reign of a previous king, bad omens occurred (i 20) in Sumer and Akkad. The people living there were answering each other yes for no (and) were telling lies. (i 25) They led their gods away, neglected their goddesses, abandoned their rites, (and) embraced quite different (rites). They put their hands on the possessions of Esagil, the palace of the gods, (i 30) an inaccessible place, and they sold the silver, gold, (and) precious stones at market value to the land Elam.
The Enlil of the gods, the god Marduk, became angry and plotted evilly to level the land (and) to destroy its people. The river Araḫtu, (normally) a river of abundance, turned into an angry wave, (i 40) a raging tide, a huge flood like the deluge. It swept (its) waters destructively across the city (and) its dwellings and turned (them) into ruins. The gods dwelling in it (i 45) flew up to the heavens like birds; the people living in it were hidden in another place and took refuge in (ii 1) an unknown land. The merciful god Marduk wrote that the calculated time of its abandonment (should last) 70 years, (but) his heart was quickly soothed, and he reversed the numbers and (thus) ordered its (re)occupation to be (after) 11 years.
You truly selected me, Esarhaddon, in the assembly of my older brothers to put these matters right, and (ii 15) you (are the one) who placed your sweet protection over me, swept away all of my enemies like a flood, killed all of my foes and made me attain my wish, (and), (ii 20) to appease the heart of your great divinity (and) to please your spirit, you entrusted me with shepherding Assyria.
At the beginning of my kingship, in my first year, when I sat in greatness on (my) royal throne, good signs were established for me; in heaven and on earth, he (the god Marduk) constantly sent me his omen(s). (ii 30) The angry gods were reconciled (and) they repeatedly disclosed favorable signs concerning the (re)building of Babylon (and) the renovation of Esagil.
Bright Jupiter, the giver of decisions on Akkad, came near in Simānu (III) and stood in the place where the sun shines. It was shining brightly (and) its appearance was red. It reached (its) hypsoma for a second time in the month “Opening of the Door” and stayed in its place.
He (the god Marduk) ordered me to complete the cult centers, to renovate the shrines, (and) to organize well the rites of Esagil, the palace of the gods. (ii 45) Every month, the gods Sîn and Šamaš together, at their appearance, answered me with a firm ‘yes’ concerning the avenging of Akkad.
By means of the great intelligence (and) vast understanding that the sage of the gods, the prince, the god Nudimmud, gave to me, it occurred to me to (re)populate that city, to renovate (iii 5) the shrines, (and) to make the cult center shine, and my heart prompted (me) to perform that work.
I was afraid (and) worried to preform that work (and) I knelt before the gods Šamaš, Adad, (and) Marduk, (iii 10) the great judge(s), the gods, my lords. In the diviner’s bowl, trustworthy oracles were established for me, and they had (their response) concerning the (re)building of (iii 15) Babylon (and) renovation of Esagil written on a liver.
I trusted in their firm ‘yes’ and I mustered all of my craftsmen and the people of (iii 20) Karduniaš (Babylonia) to its full extent. I had them wield hoes and I imposed baskets (on them). I mixed (the mud for) its revetment with fine oil, honey, ghee, kurunnu-wine, muttinnu-wine, (and) pure mountain beer. In order to show the people his great divinity and to inspire awe (in) his lordship, I raised a basket (iii 30) onto my head and carried (it) myself. I had its bricks made in brickmolds of musukkannu-wood. I gathered together (iii 35) expert craftsmen (and) skilled master builders, who lay out plans, exposed the place where Esagil stands, and inspected its structure.
In a favorable month, on a propitious day, I laid its foundation platform over its previous foundations (iii 45) (and) in (exact) accordance with its earlier plan I did not diminish (it) by one cubit nor increase (it) by half a cubit. I built (and) completed Esagil, the palace of the gods, an image of the apsû, a replica of Ešarra, a likeness of (iii 50) the abode of the god Ea, (and) a replica of Pegasus; I had (Esagil) ingeniously built (and) I laid out (iv 1) (its) square. For its roof, I stretched out magnificent cedar beams, grown on Mount Amanus, the pure mountain, (and) fastened bands of gold (and) silver on (iv 5) doors of cypress, whose fragrance is sweet, and installed (them) in its gates.
I repaired the woeful desecrated state of the gods and goddess who lived in it, who had been displaced by floods and storm, and whose appearances had become dim; I made their dimmed appearance bright, cleaned (iv 15) their dirty garments, (and) had them permanently installed on their daises. (As for) the šēdu s, lamassu s, (and) rābiṣu-demons of the temple, I repaired their dilapidated part(s), (and) I (re)stationed them ... where their ... are.
(No translation possible)
With the large aslu-cubit, I measured the dimensions of Imgur-Enlil, its great wall — each length (and) width was 30 ašlu s. I had (it) built as it was before and (v 5) raised (its top) up like a mountain. I built (and) completed Nēmed-Enlil, its outer wall, (and) filled (it) with splendor (making it) an object of wonder for all of the people.
I established anew the remission of debts of the wronged citizens of Babylon, people (entitled to) the privileged status (and) freedom (guaranteed by) the gods Anu and Enlil. I gathered the bought people who had become slaves (and) who had been distributed among the (foreign) riffraff and (v 20) counted (them once again) as Babylonians. I returned their looted possessions, provided the naked with clothing, (and) let them take the road to Babylon. (v 25) I encouraged them to (re)settle the city, build houses, plant orchards, (and) dig canals.
I restored their interrupted privileged status that had fallen into disuse. I wrote anew the tablet of their exemptions. (v 35) I opened roads for them in all directions so that they could establish an important position by having (commercial) relations with all countries.
Let the seed of my priestly office endure (along) with the foundations of Esagil and Babylon; let (vi 5) (my) kingship be sustaining to the people forever like the plant of life so that I may shepherd (vi 10) their populace in truth and justice; (and) let me reach old age, attain extreme old age, (and) be sated with the prime of life until far-off days. Truly I am the provider.
Let me enlarge my family, gather my relatives, (and) extend my progeny so that they branch out widely; (vi 20) let him make the foundations of the throne of my priestly office be as secure a great mountain; let my reign endure as long as heaven and earth; let me stride beaming daily (vi 25) in joy, gladness, happiness, shining face, (and) happy mood; (and) let a happy fate, (vi 30) a good fate, (one) for the lengthening of the days of my reign, the protection of the throne of my priestly office, (and) the well-being of my offspring be placed in their (the gods’) mouths.
May he allow my hands to grasp the righteous scepter that enlarges the land (and) the fierce staff that humbles the unsubmissive; may they cause my weapons to rise up so that I may kill my enemies; (and) may he allow me to stand over my enemies in victory (and) triumph.
Let them allow there to be in my land rains and floods, successful harvests, an abundance of grain, plenty, and prosperity, and let them store (it) in piles of grain.
I had foundation inscriptions made of silver, gold, bronze, lapis lazuli, alabaster, basalt, pendû-stone, elallu-stone, (and) white limestone, (as well as) inscribed objects of baked clay, and (then) I depicted on them hieroglyphs representing the writing of my name. I wrote on them the might of the great hero, the god Marduk, (and) the deeds (vii 15) that I had done, my pious work, (and) I placed (these inscriptions) in the foundations (and) left (them) for far-off days.
In future days, in far-off days, may one of the kings, my descendants, whom the king of the gods, the god Marduk, names to rule the land and the people, read an inscription (vii 25) written in my name, and anoint (it) with oil, make an offering, (and) return (it) to its place. The god Marduk, king of the gods, will (then) hear his prayers.
(As for) the one who changes (an inscription) written in my name, defaces my representations, annuls the privileged status of Babylon, (and) breaks the covenant of the lord of lords, may (vii 35) the god Marduk, the Enlil of the gods, the lord of the lands, look with fury on him and order his destruction among all of the black-headed people. May he (the god Marduk) make his word bad in Ubšukkinnaku, (vii 40) the courtyard of the assembly of the gods, the place of council, (and) order that his life not last (even) a single day.
Accession year of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria.
Esarhaddon, great king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of (i 5) Babylon, king of Sumer and Akkad, true shepherd, favorite of the lord of lords, pious prince, beloved of the goddess Zarpanītu — (i 10) the queen, the goddess of the entire universe — reverent king who from the days of his childhood (i 15) was attentive to their rule and praised their valor, pious slave, humble, submissive, the one who reveres their great divinity —
At that time, in the reign of a previous king, bad omens occurred in Sumer and Akkad. The people living there were answering each other yes (for) no (i 25) (and) were telling lies. They led their gods away, neglected their goddesses, abandoned their rites, (i 30) (and) embraced quite different (rites). They put their hands on the possessions of Esagil, the palace of the gods, an inaccessible place, and they sold the gold, silver, (and) precious stones at market value to the land Elam.
The Enlil of the gods, the god Marduk, became angry and plotted evilly to level the land (and) to destroy its people. The river Araḫtu, (ii 1) (normally) a river of abundance, turned into an angry wave, a raging tide, a huge flood like the deluge. It swept (its) waters destructively across the city (ii 5) (and) its shrines and turned (them) into ruins. The gods and goddesses dwelling in it (ii 10) flew up to the heavens like birds; the people living in it were hidden in another place and (ii 15) took refuge in an unknown land. The merciful god Marduk wrote that the calculated time of its abandonment (should last) 70 years, (but) his heart (ii 20) was quickly soothed, and he reversed the numbers and (thus) ordered its (re)occupation to be (after) 11 years.
You truly selected me, Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, in the assembly of my older brothers, to put these matters right, and (ii 30) you (are the one) who placed your sweet protection over me, swept away all of my enemies like a flood, killed all of my foes and made me attain (ii 35) (my) wish, (and), to appease the heart of your great divinity (and) to please your spirit, you entrusted me with shepherding Assyria.
At the beginning of my kingship, in my first year, when (iii 1) I sat in greatness on (my) royal throne, good signs were established for me; in heaven and on earth, he (the god Marduk) constantly sent me his omen(s). The angry gods (iii 5) were reconciled (and) they repeatedly disclosed favorable signs concerning the (re)building of Babylon (and) the renovation of Esagil.
Bright Jupiter, the giver of decisions on Akkad, came near in Simānu (III) and stood in the place where the sun shines. It was shining brightly (and) its appearance was red. It reached (its) hypsoma for a second time (iii 15) in the month “Opening of the Door” and stayed in its place.
He (the god Marduk) ordered me to complete the cult centers, to renovate the shrines, (and) to organize well the rites of Esagil, the palace of the gods. Every month, the gods Sîn and Šamaš together, (iii 25) at their appearance, answered me with a firm ‘yes’ concerning the avenging of Akkad.
By means of the great intelligence (and) vast understanding that the sage of the gods, the prince, the god Nudimmud, gave to me, it occurred to me to (re)populate that city, to renovate the shrines, (iii 35) (and) to make the cult center shine, and my heart prompted (me).
I was afraid (and) worried to perform that work (and) I knelt before (iii 40) the gods Šamaš, Adad, and Marduk, the great judge(s), the gods, my lords. In the diviner’s bowl, trustworthy oracles were established for me, and they had (their response) concerning the (re)building of (iv 5) Babylon (and) the renovation of Esagil written on a liver.
I trusted in their firm ‘yes’ and I mustered all of (iv 10) my craftsmen and the people of Karduniaš (Babylonia) to its full extent. (iv 15) I had them wield hoes and I imposed baskets (on them). I mixed (the mud for) its revetment with fine oil, honey, ghee, kurunnu-wine, muttinnu-wine, (and) pure mountain beer. (iv 20) In order to show the people his great divinity and to inspire awe (in) his lordship, (iv 25) I raised a basket onto my head and carried (it) myself. I had its bricks made in brickmolds of musukkannu-wood. I gathered together (iv 30) expert craftsmen (and) skilled master builders, who lay out plans, exposed the place where Esagil stands, and inspected its structure.
In a favorable month, on a propitious day, (v 1) I laid its foundation platform over its previous foundations (and) in (exact) accordance with its earlier plan I did not diminish (it) by one cubit nor increase (it) by half a cubit. I built (and) completed Esagil, the palace of the gods, an image of the apsû, a replica of Ešarra, a likeness of (v 5) the abode of the god Ea, (and) a replica of Pegasus; I had (Esagil) ingeniously built (and) I laid out (its) square. For its roof, I stretched out magnificent cedar beams, grown on Mount Amanus, the pure mountain.
Moreover, I built (it) up ... with musukkannu-wood, cedar, (and) terebinth, natural wood, together with bricks, so that the temple would be made permanent, the bond(s) of the wall would not disintegrate, (and) none of Esagil’s ornaments would be neglected.
At that time, I had the terrace, the place where the gods Marduk, Zarpanītu, (and) Nabû dwell, dug down 16 cubits, (where) I reached ground water. With bitumen and baked brick, (v 30) I enlarged its lower part beyond the water table and I built up its foundations as the god Nudimmud had instructed me. I raised (it) up and (v 35) heaped (it) up like a mountain for the residence of his great divinity. I built the home of the gods Marduk, Zarpanītu, and Nabû in their midst.
I fastened bands of gold, silver, (and) copper on doors of cypress, whose fragrance is sweet, and installed (them) in its gates. I refurbished the statues of the great gods (and) had (them) dwell (v 45) on their daises as an eternal dwelling. (As for) the šēdu s, lamassu s, (and) rābiṣu-demons of the temple, I repaired their dilapidated part(s), (and) I (re)stationed them ... where their ... are.
I had whatever furnishings were needed for Esagil skillfully made with artful craftsmanship from gold (and) silver, each of whose weight is 50 minas. I restored the holy rites of Esagil (and) made them more splendid than before. (vi 20) I set out before them (the gods) their pure guqqû offerings, their pure nindabû offerings, (and) their interrupted sattukku offerings. (vi 25) I placed at their service the former ramku-priests, pašīšu-priests, (and) ecstatics, those initiated in secret rites. I set before them purification priests, āšipu-priests, lamentation priests, (and) singers, who have mastered (their) entire craft.
I built anew Etemenanki, the ziqqurat, on the site where it previously stood — its length is one ašlu (and) one ṣuppān, (and) its width is one ašlu (and) one ṣuppān.
With the large aslu-cubit, I measured the dimensions of Imgur-Enlil, its great wall — each length (and) width was 30 ašlu s. I had (it) built as it was before and raised (its top) up like a mountain. I built (and) (vii 1) completed Nēmed-Enlil, its outer wall, (and) filled (it) with splendor (making it) an object of wonder for all of the people.
I returned the plundered gods of the lands from Assyria and the land Elam to their (proper) place(s), and I set up proper procedures in all of the cult centers.
I established anew the remission of debts of the wronged citizens of Babylon, people (entitled to) the privileged status (and) freedom (guaranteed by) (vii 15) the gods Anu and Enlil. I gathered the bought people who had become slaves (vii 20) (and) who had been distributed among the (foreign) riffraff and counted (them once again) as Babylonians. (vii 25) I returned their looted possessions, provided the naked with clothing, (and) let them take the road to Babylon. I encouraged them to (re)settle the city, build houses, (vii 30) plant orchards, (and) dig canals.
I restored their interrupted privileged status that had fallen into disuse. I wrote anew the tablet of their exemptions. I opened roads for them in all directions so that they could establish an important position by having (commercial) relations with all countries.
May the god Marduk and the goddess Zarpanītu, (viii 1) the gods, my helpers, look with joy upon my good deeds and bless (my) kingship in their steadfast heart(s). Let the seed of my priestly office endure (along) with the foundations of Esagil and Babylon; (viii 10) let (my) kingship be sustaining to the people forever like the plant of life (viii 15) so that I may shepherd their populace in truth and justice; (and) let me reach old age, attain extreme old age, (and) be sated with the prime of life until far-off days. Truly I am the provider.
Let me enlarge my family, gather my relatives, (and) extend my progeny (viii 25) so that they branch out widely; let him make the foundations of the throne of my priestly office as secure as a great mountain; let my reign endure as long as heaven and earth; let me stride beaming daily (viii 30) in joy, gladness, happiness, shining face, and happy mood; (and) let (viii 35) a happy fate, a good fate, (one) for the lengthening of the days of my reign, the protection of the throne of my priestly office, (and) the well-being of my offspring be placed in their (the gods’) mouths.
May he allow my hands to grasp the righteous scepter that enlarges the land (and) the fierce staff that humbles the unsubmissive; may they cause my weapons to rise up and kill my enemies; (and) may he allow me to stand over my enemies in victory (and) triumph.
May they allow there to be in my land rains and floods, successful harvests, an abundance of grain, plenty, and prosperity, and let them store (it) in piles of grain.
I had foundation inscriptions made of silver, gold, bronze, lapis lazuli, alabaster, basalt, pendû-stone, alallu-stone (and) (ix 25) white limestone, (as well as) inscribed objects of baked clay, and (then) I depicted on them hieroglyphs representing the writing of my name. (ix 30) I wrote on them the might of the great hero, the god Marduk, (and) the deeds that I had done, my pious work, (and) I placed (these inscriptions) in the foundations (and) left (them) for far-off days.
In future days, in far-off days, may one of the kings, (x 1) my descendants, whom the king of the gods, the god Marduk, (x 5) names to rule the land and the people, read an inscription written in my name, and (x 10) anoint (it) with oil, make an offering, (and) return (it) to its place. The god Marduk, king of the gods, will (then) hear his prayers.
(As for) the one who changes (an inscription) written in my name, defaces my representations, annuls the privileged status of (x 20) Babylon, (and) breaks the covenant of the lord of lords, may the god Marduk, the Enlil of the gods, the lord of the lands, look with fury on him and order his destruction (x 25) among all of the black-headed people. May he (the god Marduk) make his word bad in Ubšukkinnaku, the courtyard of the assembly of the gods, the place of council, and order that his life not last (even) a single day.
Accession year of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria.
Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of (i 5) Babylon, king of Sumer and Akkad, pious prince who reveres the gods Nabû and Marduk —
Before my time the great lord, the god Marduk, became angry, trembled (with rage), and was furious with Esagil (i 15) and Babylon; his heart was full of rage. Because of the wrath in his heart and his bad temper, Esagil and Babylon became a wasteland and turned into ruins.
Its (Babylon’s) gods and goddesses became frightened, abandoned their cellas, and went up to the heavens. The people living in it (Babylon) were distributed among the (foreign) riffraff (and) became slaves.
At the beginning of my kingship, in my first year, when I sat in greatness on (my) royal throne (and) (ii 10) (when) they (the gods) entrusted me with the lordship of the lands, the heart of the great divine lord, the god Marduk, was appeased, (ii 15) his mood was soothed; he became reconciled with Esagil and Babylon, (both of) which he had punished.
As for me, Esarhaddon, the servant who reveres his great divinity, it occurred to me (and) my heart prompted me to (re)build Esagil and Babylon, renovate (its) gods (ii 30) and goddesses, complete (its) shrines, (and) (re)confirm (its) sattukku offerings. (iii 5) I was encouraged and ordered the (re)building.
I gathered the peoples of the lands conquered by me and had them take up hoe (and) basket. I mixed (the mud for) its revetment with fine oil, honey, ghee, (iii 15) kurunnu-wine, muttinnu-wine (and) pure mountain beer. (iii 20) In order to show the people his great divinity and to inspire awe (in) his lordship, (iii 25) I raised a basket onto my head and carried (it) myself.
I had its bricks made for a whole year in brickmolds of ivory, ebony, boxwood, (and) musukkannu-wood. I built anew (and) completed Esagil, the palace of the gods, together with its shrines, from its foundations to its battlements. (iii 45) I made (it) greater than before, raised (it) up, glorified (it), (and) made (it) glisten like the stars (lit. “writing”) of the firmament. I filled (it) with splendor (making it) an object of wonder for all of the people.
I refurbished the gods and goddesses who lived in it (and) (iv 1) had (them) dwell on their daises as an eternal dwelling. I (re)confirmed their interrupted sattukku offerings. I had whatever furnishings (iv 10) were needed for Esagil and its shrines made from gold, silver, and bronze, and I placed (them) in their midst.
I had Babylon, (which was measured by) the aslu-cubit checked by the gods, Imgur-Enlil, its wall, (and) Nēmed-Enlil, its outer wall, built anew with the work of the god Kulla and I raised (them) like mountains.
I am the one who (re)built Babylon, (re)constructed Esagil, renewed (it) gods and goddesses, completed (its) shrines, (re)confirmed (its) sattukku offerings, (and) who gathered its (Babylon’s) scattered people.
May the Enlil of the gods, the god Marduk, (v 5) and the goddess Zarpanītu, the queen, look with joy upon the work of my good deeds and order the prolongation of my days, (v 10) (and) discuss my years to be many; may they decree as my fate the protection of my offspring, the increase of (v 15) my progeny, the expansion of my family so that they branch out widely; (v 20) like a father and mother, may they come over to my side in battle and warfare; may they come to my aid; (and) may they make my weapons rise up (and) kill my enemies.
Let me attain whatever my heart desires (and) may they allow me to stand in victory (and) triumph over my enemies; let me squash all of my enemies (v 35) like ants; let him (the god Marduk) make the foundation of the throne of my priestly office be as secure as a great mountain; (v 40) (and) let my reign endure as long as the foundations of Esagil and Babylon. May all of the great gods who sit on daises (v 45) in Babylon bless my kingship until far-off days (and) may they order security for my reign forever.
I had foundation inscriptions made of silver, gold, lapis lazuli, alabaster, basalt, pendû-stone, elallu-stone, (vi 10) (and) white limestone, (as well as) inscribed objects of baked clay, and (vi 15) (then) I wrote the might of the great hero, the god Marduk, (and) the deeds that I (text: “he”) had done, my pious work. I placed (these inscriptions) in the foundations (and) left (them) for far-off days.
In future days, in far-off days, may one of the kings, my descendants, whom the king of the gods, the god Marduk, names to rule the land and people, (vi 30) read an inscription written in my name, and anoint (it) with oil, make an offering, (vi 35) (and) return (it) to its place. The god Marduk, the king of the gods, will (then) hear his prayers.
(As for) the one who changes (an inscription) written in my name, defaces my representations, destroys my handiwork, may the great divine lord, the god Marduk, (vi 50) glare at him angrily among all of the rulers, and make his name (and) his descendant(s) disappear from the land. May he have no pity on him forever.
Accession year of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria.
from gold, each of whose weight is fifty minas.
I built (and) completed Nēmed-Enlil, its outer wall, (and) had (it) filled with splendor, (making it) an object of wonder for all of the people.
I returned the plundered gods of the lands from Assyria and the land Elam to their place and I set up proper procedures in all of the cult centers.
I restored their interrupted privileged status that had fallen into disuse. (vii 10) I wrote anew the tablet of their exemptions. I opened roads for them in all directions so that they could establish an important position by having (commercial) relations with all countries.
I restored order to the disturbances at Kish and made light shine forth for the confused people.
The god Marduk and the goddess Zarpanītu, the gods,
I am indeed the provider.
Let me enlarge my family, gather my relatives, (and) extend my progeny (viii 10´) so that they branch out widely; let him (the god Marduk) make the foundation of the throne of my priestly office be as secure as a great mountain; (viii 20´) let my reign endure as long as heaven and earth; let me stride beaming daily in joy, gladness, happiness, shining face, (and) happy mood; (viii 30´) (and) let a happy fate, a good fate, (one) for the lengthening of the days of my reign, the protection of the throne of my priestly office, (viii 40´) (and) the well-being of my offspring be placed in their (the gods’) mouths.
The scepter
Let them allow there to be in my land rains and floods, successful harvests, an abundance of grain, plenty, and prosperity, and (ix 10´) let them store (it) in piles of grain.
I had foundation inscriptions made of silver, gold, bronze, lapis lazuli, alabaster, basalt, pendû-stone, (ix 20´) elallu-stone, (and) white limestone, (as well as) inscribed objects of baked clay, and (then) I depicted on them hieroglyphs representing the writing of my name. (ix 30´) I wrote on them the might of the great hero, the god Marduk, (and) the deeds that I had done, my pious work, (and) (ix 40´) I placed (these inscriptions) in the foundations (and) for far-off days.
May he (a future king) read an inscription written in my name, and anoint (it) with oil, make an offering, (x 10´) (and) return (it) to its place. The god Marduk, king of the gods, will (then) hear his prayers.
(As for) the one who changes (an inscription) written in my name, defaces my representations, (vi´ 20´) annuls the privileged status of Babylon, (and) breaks the covenant of the lord of lords, may the god Marduk, the Enlil of the gods, the lord of the lands, (x 30´) look with fury on him and among all
... ... ... ... ... matter. They were afflicted by thieving (and) murdering. They were stealing from the poor (and) giving to the mighty; there was oppression (and) (i 10′) the taking of bribes in the city. Every day, without ceasing, they stole goods from each other, a son (i 15′) cursed his father in the street, a slave ... to his owner,
... ... ... His mood became furious. The Enlil of the gods, the lord of the lands, plotted evilly to scatter the land and people; (ii 10′) his heart schemed to level the land and to destroy its people. A bitter curse was set in his mouth.
Bad omens concerning the destruction of mankind occurred in heaven and on earth.
... ... ... He (the god Marduk) brought about the destruction of the city (Babylon) and reed-marshes (iii 5′) and poplars grew profusely in it and threw out many offshoots. There were (iii 10′) birds of the heavens (and) fish of the apsû, without number, in it.
... ... good signs were established for me; in heaven and on earth, he (the god Marduk) constantly sent me his omen(s) concerning the (re)settling of the city (iv 5′) and the renovation of its shrines. I mustered all of the craftsmen throughout Karduniaš (Babylonia). They cut down the trees and reeds with axes (iv 15′) (and) tore out their roots. I diverted the waters of the Euphrates River, the washout, from its midst and (re)directed (them) to their previous channels.
Let ... ... be placed in his mouth; let him (the god Marduk) bless me with a blessing of long days (and) order the well-being of my reign forever.
Ayyāru (II), accession year of Esarhaddon, king of Assyria.
true shepherd, favorite of the lord of lords, pious ruler, the one who is loved by the goddess Zarpanītu — the queen, (i 5′) goddess of the entire universe — reverent king who was attentive to their rule and praised their valor, pious slave, humble, submissive, the one who reveres their great divinity —
You (are the one) who entrusted him with renovating the destroyed shrines, (i 15′) making the cult centers shine, and shepherding all of the people; elevated him to the kingship to organize well the forgotten rites and (i 20′) to avenge the land of Akkad; (and) to appease the heart of your great divinity (and) to please your spirit, you chose him for power.
At that time, in the reign of a king who preceded me, bad omens occurred.
The people of all of the cult centers ... ...
... ... they abandoned their rites and ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... they were inciting criminal acts (and) infringing on a taboo, in ... ... ... ... ... ... (and) they fomented a conspiracy.
They put their hands on the possessions of Esagil and the citizens of Babylon and plundered its goods, gold, silver, ... from inside the temple (and) sold (it) at market value to the land Elam.
... ... ... ... ... and ... ... the glory of the god Marduk, the great lord, my lord, (and) the deeds that I had done ... ... ... ... ... the writing of my name ... I depicted and ... ... I placed (them) ....
May the god Marduk, the great lord, look with joy upon my good deeds and
I placed at their service the former ramku-priests, pašīšu-priests, (and) ecstatics, those initiated in secret rites. I set before them purification priests, āšipu-priests, lamentation priests, (and) singers, who have mastered (their) entire craft.
I built anew Etemenanki,
May the god Marduk and the goddess Zarpanītu, the gods, my helpers, look with joy upon my good deeds and bless my kingship in their steadfast heart(s). (ii′ 5′) Let the seed of my priestly office endure (along) with the foundations of Esagil (and) Babylon; let my kingship be sustaining to the people forever like the plant of life so that I may shepherd their populace in truth and justice; ... ...
... basalt. The glory of the great lord, my lord, (and) the deeds I had done ... ...
The people living there were answering each other yes (for) no. They neglected their goddesses, abandoned their rites, (and) (i 5′) embraced quite different (rites). They put their hands on the possessions of Esagil, the palace of the gods, an inaccessible place, and they sold the gold, silver, (and) precious stones at market value to the land Elam.
The Enlil of the gods, the god Marduk, became angry and plotted evilly to level the land (and) to destroy its people.
I built (and) completed Esagil ... a replica of Ešarra, a likeness of the abode of the god Ea, (and) a replica of Pegasus, (and) I laid out (its) square. (v 5′) For its roof, I stretched out magnificent cedar beams, grown on Mount Amanus, the pure mountain, (and) fastened bands of gold (and) silver on doors of cypress, whose fragrance is sweet, and installed (them) in its gates.
(As for) the šēdu s, lamassu s, (and) rābiṣu-demons of the temple, I repaired their dilapidated part(s) (and) I (re)stationed them where their ... are.
I gathered the bought people who had become slaves (and) who had been distributed among the (foreign) riffraff and counted (them once again) as Babylonians. I returned their looted possessions, (vi 5′) provided the naked with clothing, (and) let them take the road to Babylon. I encouraged them to (re)settle the city, build houses, plant orchards, (and) dig canals.
I restored their interrupted privileged status. I wrote anew the tablet of their exemptions.
Let me stride beaming daily in joy, gladness, happiness, shining face, (and) happy mood; (and) let a happy fate, a good fate, (one) for the lengthening of the days of (vii 5′) my reign, the protection of the throne of my priestly office, (and) the well-being of my offspring be placed in their (the gods’) mouths.
May he allow my hands to grasp the righteous scepter that enlarges the land (and) the fierce staff that humbles the unsubmissive;
May he (the god Marduk) make his name (and) his descendant(s) disappear from the land. May he have no pity on him forever.
Accession year of Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria.
Esarhaddon, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the kings of (Lower) Egypt, Upper Egypt, and Kush, (i 5) king of the four quarters, the king who has no rival in all of the lands; son of Sennacherib, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria; ... s of Sumer and Akkad,
... ... ... ... ... placed before them ... the temples, all of them, (iii 5) ... ... that were ruined ... brought ...... the god Šamaš
of Sumer and Akkad, which previously no one had ...; who piles up heaps of grain, who drove out hunger and famine during his days (iv 5) and established prosperity; who brought to the land stable prices, bountiful harvests, (and) an abundance of grain; in whose reign the land Elam was disobedient; the evil enemy, the powerful offspring of the gods, (iv 10) rose up against the wishes of the gods and set out to attack ... of Akkad;... ... his wide land; ... he mustered ... and ... men and women; (iv 15) they frequently entered ... ... and neighborhoods ... ...
... ... weapons ... may they kill (my) enemies (and) cut down (my) foes; may the god Nergal, lord of pestilence and murder, stretch out his protection over them, (v 5) spare the lives of their people, (and) save them, their army, and their camp from anguish; may the god Adad, the canal inspector of heaven and netherworld, make plentiful rains (and) widespread floods (v 10) long lasting in their land; night and day, may the great gods of heaven and netherworld look upon them with joy in their steadfast hearts; may a god ... their ... to (another) god; may their days be long (and) their years be long lasting; (v 15) in Esagil, the palace of the gods, ... may their offspring thrive; may ... be cursed; wherever the gods Sîn and Šamaš ... let them order good things for them; ... with the black-headed people forever.
Whoever among the future kings ... who comes up and searches for ..., may he read an inscription written in my name and anoint (it) with oil, ... ... write my name with his name, ... my deeds ... ... ...
Esarhaddon, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of Sumer and Akkad, chosen by the god Marduk (and) the goddess Zarpanītu, true shepherd, favorite of the god Aššur and the goddess Mullissu, the king who from his childhood trusted in the gods Nabû, Tašmētu, and Nanāya and (5) knew their power; son of Sennacherib, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria; descendant of Sargon (II), great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of Sumer and Akkad; descendant of the eternal line of Bēl-bāni, whose ultimate origin is Baltil (Aššur) —
Before my time, the great lord, the god Marduk, became furious with Esagil and Babylon, (and) his heart was full of rage. (10) His people were answering each other with yes (for) no (and) were speaking untruthfully. They put their hands on the possessions of the great lord, the god Marduk, and gave (them) to the land Elam as a bribe. Their deeds were displeasing to the god Marduk (and) the goddess Zarpanītu, and they (the gods) ordered their scattering. He (the god Marduk) made (its) waters sweep destructively across the city and he turned (it) into fallow land. Its gods and goddesses took fright and went up to the heavens. The site of the city was torn out and its foundation platform(s) could not be seen.
At the beginning of my kingship, in my first year, when I sat in greatness on (my) royal throne, the merciful god Marduk’s heart was appeased and he became reconciled with the city that had angered (him). I had Esagil and Babylon built anew. I renovated the statues of the great gods (and) had (them) dwell on their seats as an eternal dwelling. I completed the temple of the god Aššur (and) set up proper procedures in all of the cult centers.
At that time, Eniggidrukalamasuma, the temple of the god Nabû of the ḫarû, its site had become a heap of ruins and changed into a tell (so that) the top of its foundations could not be seen (and) its shape could not be determined. I, Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, whose mind the gods Aššur, Sîn, Šamaš, Bēl, (and) Nabû opened for completing the cult centers (and) renovating (their) shrines — it occurred to me and my heart prompted me to (re)build Eniggidrukalamasuma.
I opened up its dirt piles and surveyed (and) examined its structure. I measured its foundation platform in (exact) accordance with its earlier plan and did not add (even) a single brick more. In a favorable month, on a propitious day, I laid its foundation and secured its brickwork. I built (and) completed that temple from its foundations to its parapets (and) made (it) shine like daylight.
May the god Nabû, the sublime son, look with joy upon this work, bless my kingship with his steadfast heart, (and) allow my hand to grasp the righteous scepter that widens the land. For Ashurbanipal, crown prince of Assyria, and Šamaš-šuma-ukīn, crown prince of Babylon, both brothers, my offspring, may they decree as their destiny a good fate, a favorable fate, one of the lengthening of the days of their reigns (and) the protection of the throne(s) of their priestly offices; may their kingships ... lead my land in truth and justice; (and) may the gods Sîn and Šamaš together keep answering the true princes with a firm ‘yes’!
In future days, in far-off days, may a future ruler, who renovates the dilapidated section(s) of this temple when it becomes dilapidated and old, place my inscribed name with his name. The god Nabû, the sublime son, the one who gives scepter, throne, (and) reign, will (then) hear his prayers.
Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of Sumer and Akkad, pious prince, who reveres the gods Nabû and Marduk —
Before my time, in the reign of a previous king, bad omens occurred in Sumer and Akkad. (i 10) The people living there were answering each other yes (for) no (and) were telling lies. They put their hands on the possessions of Esagil, (i 15) the palace of the gods, and they sold the gold, silver, (and) precious stones at market value to the land Elam.
The Enlil of the gods, the god Marduk, became angry and plotted evilly to level the land (and) to destroy its people. The river Araḫtu, (ii 1) (normally) a river of abundance, turned into a huge flood like the deluge, (and) swept (its) waters destructively across the city, its dwellings, (...), (and) its shrines, (ii 5) and turned (them) into ruins. The gods and goddesses dwelling in it went up to the heavens; the people living in it were distributed among the (foreign) riffraff (and) became slaves.
The merciful god Marduk wrote that the calculated time of its abandonment (should last) 70 years, (but) his heart was quickly soothed, and he reversed the numbers and (thus) ordered its (re)occupation to be (after) 11 years.
You truly selected me, Esarhaddon, in the assembly of my older brothers, to put these matters right, and (iii 1) you (are the one) who placed your sweet protection over me, swept away all of my enemies like a flood, killed all of my foes and (iii 5) made me attain my wish, (and), to appease the heart of your great divinity (and) to please your spirit, you entrusted (me) with shepherding Assyria.
At the beginning of my kingship, in my first year, when I sat in greatness on (my) royal throne, good signs were established for me; in heaven (and) on earth, he (the god Marduk) constantly sent me his omen(s).
I was afraid (and) worried to preform that work (and) I knelt before the gods Šamaš, Adad, (and) Marduk, the great judge(s), the gods, my lords. In the diviner’s bowl, (iii 20) trustworthy oracles were established for me, and they had (their response) concerning the (re)building of Babylon (and) the renovation of Esagil written on a liver.
I trusted in their firm ‘yes’ and I mustered all of my craftsmen and the people of Karduniaš (Babylonia) (iv 5) to its full extent. I had them wield hoes and I imposed baskets (on them). I mixed (the mud for) its revetment with fine oil, honey, ghee, kurunnu-wine, (and) pure mountain beer. (iv 10) I raised a basket onto my head and carried (it) myself. I had its bricks made for one year in brickmolds of ivory, ebony, boxwood, (and) musukkannu-wood.
I had Esagil, the palace of the gods, and its shrines, Babylon, the privileged city, Imgur-Enlil, its wall, (iv 20) (and) Nēmed-Enlil, its outer wall, built anew from their foundations to their parapets. I made (them) greater (than before), raised (them) up, (and) glorified (them).
I refurbished the statues of the great gods (and) I had (them) dwell on their daises as an eternal dwelling. I (re)confirmed their interrupted sattukku offerings.
I gathered the citizens of Babylon who had become slaves (and) who had been distributed among the (foreign) riffraff and I counted (them once again) as Babylonians. I established anew their privileged status.
... ... ... the slave girl did not listen to her mistress. They led their gods away, neglected their goddesses, abandoned their rites, and embraced quite different (rites); ... they were inciting criminal acts (and) infringing on a taboo; (5′) ... they discontinued sattukku offerings. They fomented a conspiracy. They (Babylon’s citizens) put their hands on the possessions of Esagil and the citizens of Babylon and they plundered its goods, gold, silver, (and) stones from inside the temple (and) sold (them) at market value to the land Elam.
The god Enlil saw ... and his heart became angry (and) his mood became furious. The Enlil of the gods, the lord of the lands, plotted evilly to scatter the land and people; to level the land and to destroy its people, his heart was angry. A bitter curse was placed in his mouth.
Many bad omens concerning the destruction of mankind occurred in heaven and on earth. The path of the Enlil-stars, the path of the Anu-stars, (and) the path of the Ea-stars changed their position(s) for the worse (and) they constantly revealed signs portending destruction. ... ... in the same way, its signs became increasingly bad.
The river Araḫtu, (normally) a river of abundance, turned into an angry wave, a raging tide, a huge flood like the deluge. It swept (its) waters destructively across the city, its dwelling(s), (and) its shrines, and turned (them) into a swamp. The gods (and goddesses) dwelling in it flew up to the heavens like birds. The šēdu s (and) lamassu s ... fled and were wandering around outside. The people living in it were hidden in another place and took refuge in an unknown land.
As time passed, the heart of the great lord, the god Marduk, was soothed and he became reconciled with the land that he had punished. As the seventy years passed, ... he (the god Marduk) wrote ‘ 11 years ’, had pity, and said ‘ Aḫulap! ’
(As for) me, Esarhaddon, ..., who knows how to revere his great divinity, ... were established for me at the beginning of my kingship, in my first year, when I sat on the throne of my priestly office, when I wore the crown of lordship, and .... They (the gods) constantly revealed good omen(s) to me concerning the (re)population of the city and the temple.
Bright Jupiter(, the giver of decisions on Akkad,) came near in Simānu (III) and stood in the place where the sun shines. It was shining brightly (and) its appearance was red. ... (and) there were copious rains (and) regular floods in Akkad. It (Jupiter) reached (its) hypsoma for a second time in the month “Opening of the Door” and stayed in its place.
In order to triumph (and) to show overpowering strength, he (the god Marduk) revealed to me good omen(s) concerning the (re-)entering of Esagil. Every month, the gods Sîn (and) Šamaš together, at their appearance, answered me with a firm ‘yes’ concerning (the renewing of the gods,) the completion of the shrines (and) cult centers, the stability of my reign (and) the securing of the throne of my priestly office.
By means of the great intelligence (and) vast understanding which the sage of the gods, the prince, the god Nudimmud, gave to me, it occurred to me to (re)populate that city, to renovate its shrines, (and) to make the cult center shine, and my mind prompted (me).
I was afraid (and) worried to perform that work and I knelt before the gods Šamaš, Adad, (and) Marduk, the great judge(s), the gods, my lords. In the diviner’s bowl, good sign(s) were established for me, and they had (their response) concerning the (re)population of the city (and) the renovation of Esagil written on a liver.
I trusted in their firm ‘yes’ and I mustered all of my craftsmen and (the people of) Karduniaš (Babylonia). I imposed baskets (on them and) had them wield hoes. I mixed (the mud for) its revetment with fine oil, honey, ghee, kurunnu-wine, muttinnu-wine, (and) mountain beer. I had its bricks made for a whole year in brickmolds of musukkannu-wood. I gathered together expert craftsmen (and) skilled master builders, who lay out plans.
I laid the foundations of Esagil, the palace of the gods, and secured its brickwork. ... fashioned skillfully (and) I drew its ground plan exactly as it had been written. With the large aslu-cubit, I measured the dimensions of..., in (exact) accordance with its earlier plan.... I made its foundation platform as strong as the base of a mighty mountain, ... ... (and) built its structure as it was in former days.
I built Etemenanki, the ziqqurat, as it was before — its length is one ašlu (and) one ṣuppān, (and) its width is one ašlu (and) one ṣuppān.
I offered pure offerings to ... the great gods and the god Kulla, the lord of foundations (and) bricks. I laid their foundations with... ..., wine, (and) kurunnu-wine, and I secured their footings.
I had foundation inscriptions made of (...) basalt (and) I wrote on them the glory of the great lord, my lord, and I placed (them) in their (Esagil’s and Etemenanki’s) midst. ... I restored its precious rituals and ... I established ... ... ... ... ...
... ... ... pious ruler, beloved of the goddess Zarpanītu, ..., reverent king who is attentive to their rule, ..., pious slave, humble, ... —
You (are the one) who entrusted to him with ... renovating the destroyed shrines ... ... to organize well the forgotten rites ... to appease the heart of your great divinity ....
In the reign of a king who preceded me, ....
The people of all of the cult centers, all of ... who dwell within it ... ... no one ... ... ...
Property of the god Marduk, <<...>> seal of the god Adad of Esagil.
To the god Marduk, great lord, his lord: Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, presented (this object) for the sake of his life.
For the god Marduk, his lord: Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, (and) king of Babylon, made the processional way of Esagil and Babylon shine with baked bricks from a (ritually) pure kiln.
For the god Marduk, his lord: Esarhaddon, king of Assyria (and) king of Babylon, had baked bricks made anew for Esagil and Babylon.
For the god Marduk, his lord: Esarhaddon, king of Assyria (and) king of Babylon, had baked bricks made anew for Esagil and Etemenanki.
For the god Marduk, his lord: Esarhaddon, king of Assyria (and) king of Babylon, had baked bricks made anew for Esagil (and) Etemenanki.
For the god Marduk, his lord: Esarhaddon, king of Assyria (5) (and) king of Babylon, had baked bricks made anew for Esagil and Etemenanki.
For the god Marduk, his lord: Esarhaddon, king of Assyria (and) king of Babylon, had Etemenanki built anew.
For the god Marduk, his lord: Esarhaddon, king of Assyria (and) king of Babylon, had baked bricks made anew for Etemenanki.
For the god Asari (Marduk), his lord: Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, (5) king of the world, king of the four quarters, governor of Babylon, (and) king of Sumer (and) Akkad, (re)constructed Etemenanki for the sake of his life.
Copy of (a text from) Babylon; copied and collated.
Tablet of Šamaš-nāṣir, descendant of the Miller.
... ... ... ... ...
... who to his ... not ... ...
... ... paid attention to the mention of his name, his command ...
... brings quickly before ...
... unsubmissive to the command
... destroyed that one, making the inhabited world shake
... the god, his helper,
... with his help, they knelt, beseeching his lordship
... did not bear my yoke (lit. “pull my yoke-rope”)
who took away the fields of the citizens of Babylon and Borsippa, appropriating (them) for himself
... did not fear his command or the mention of his name, and was not afraid of his lordship
... inundated and leveled like a flood.
... his own fear overwhelmed him and his life ended.
... he took as booty and brought to Assyria.
Esarhaddon, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, descendant of the eternal line of Bēl-bāni, son of Adasi, king of Assyria, precious scion of Baltil (Aššur), (one of) royal lineage (and) ancient stock —
At that time ... the temple of the goddess Gula of Borsippa, the site of which had become weak due to the strength of the (river’s) destructive flooding, ... I (re-)erected its dilapidated parts and reinforced its structure.
May the goddess Gula, ..., look upon this work of mine with pleasure and
(No translation possible)
For the goddess Queen-of-Nippur, ruler of Uzu-mu-a, august, eminent, most splendid of the gods, the goddess Innini, supreme lady who always cares like a mother for the king — her favorite — who makes his reign lengthy (and) bestows on him power and might, queen of Nippur, who dwells in Ebaradurgara, the temple which makes firm the royal abode, the great lady, his lady:
Esarhaddon, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, selected by the steadfast heart of the god Enlil; (5) who from his childhood trusted in the gods Aššur, Enlil, Sîn, Šamaš, Adad, Marduk, Nabû, Nergal, and the (other) great gods, his lords, (who) allowed him to attain his desire; (the one who) recognized their power, (the one) over whom (the gods) extended their eternal protection in order to appease their divine heart(s) and set their mind(s) at rest; (the one who) by the might of the gods Aššur, Enlil, Bēl (Marduk), and the Son-of-Bēl (Nabû), the gods, his helpers, ruled over all lands and made all rulers submissive to him; the one who (re)constructed the temple of the god Aššur, renovated Ekur, (re)built Esagil and Babylon, completed the sanctuaries and cult centers, (and) (re)confirmed (their) sattukku offerings; the king during the days of whose reign the great lord, the god Marduk, became reconciled to Babylon (and again) took up his residence in Esagil, his palace; (10) (the one who) made the god Great-Anu enter into his city Dēr and his temple Edimgalkalama (“House, Great Bond of the Land”) and had (him) sit upon (his) eternal dais; (the one who) restored the splendid appearance of the plundered gods of the lands, returned them from Assyria to their (proper) places, and (re)confirmed their income; wise prince, expert who knows every craft, who constantly established appropriate procedures in the great cult centers (and) has purification rites performed correctly; son of Sennacherib, king of the world (and) king of Assyria; descendant of Sargon (II), king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, (and) king of the land of Sumer and Akkad; descendant of the eternal line of Bēl-bāni, son of Adasi, king of Assyria; precious scion of Baltil (Aššur), (one of) royal lineage (and) ancient stock —
At that time Ebaradurgara, the temple of the goddess Queen-of-Nippur, the great lady, my lady, which a previous king had built, became old and its walls buckled. I sought its (original) emplacement, removed its dilapidated parts, (and) surveyed its (entire) foundation. I completely (re)built (it) with the work of the god Kulla according to its ancient specifications (and) raised its top (as high) as a mountain.
May the goddess Queen-of-Nippur, supreme lady, my lady, look upon this work with pleasure and may a good word for me be set upon her lips! May she determine as my fate a long life, fullness of old age, good health, and happiness!
If at any time in the future, during the days of the reign of some future ruler, this temple falls into disrepair and becomes dilapidated, may (that ruler) seek out its (original) emplacement (and) repair its dilapidated parts! May he anoint an inscription written in my name with oil, make an offering, (and) set (it) back in its place! The gods will (then) hear his prayers. He will lengthen (his) days (and) enlarge (his) family.
(But as for) the one who by some crafty device destroys an inscription written in my name or changes its position, may the goddess Queen-of-Nippur, great lady, glare at him angrily and make his name (and) his descendant(s) disappear from every land!
(Property) of Ebaradurgara.
For the god Enlil, king of the gods, valiant, who drives out the enemies in battle, ... the sublime, who walks at the side of the king — his favorite — the one who conquers the enemies ... ... — which is in Nippur (Duranki) — great lord, his lord:
Esarhaddon, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, selected by the steadfast heart of the god Enlil;
who from his childhood trusted in the gods Aššur, Enlil, Sîn, Šamaš, Adad, Marduk, Nabû, Nergal, and the (other) great gods, his lords, (who) allowed him to attain his desire; (the one who) recognized their power,
(the one) over whom (the gods) extended their eternal protection in order to appease their divine heart(s) and set their mind(s) at rest;
(the one who) by the might of the gods Aššur, Enlil, Bēl (Marduk), and the Son-of-Bēl (Nabû), the gods, his helpers, ruled over all lands and (10) made all rulers submissive to him; the one who (re)constructed the temple of the god Aššur, renovated Ekur, (re)built Esagil and Babylon, completed the sanctuaries and cult centers, (and) (re)confirmed (their) sattukku offerings; the king during the days of whose reign the great lord, the god Marduk, became reconciled to Babylon (and again) took up his residence in Esagil, his palace; (15) (the one who) made the god Great-Anu enter into his city Dēr and his temple Edimgalkalama (“House, Great Bond of the Land”) and had (him) sit upon (his) eternal dais; ...
... ... ... and make his name (and) his descendant(s) disappear from every land!
For the god Enlil, lord of the lands, his lord: Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, (5) king of Babylon, (and) king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, son of Sennacherib, king of the world (and) king of Assyria, (10) descendant of Sargon (II), king of the world (and) king of Assyria, renovated Ekur, the temple of the god Enlil, my lord, and made its processional way shine like daylight.
For the god Enlil, divine lord of the lands: Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, king of Babylon, (and) king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, for the sake of his life enlarged Pukudadaga (5) in the courtyard of the god Enlil with baked bricks from a (ritually) pure kiln.
For the goddess Ištar, supreme lady, sovereign of heaven and netherworld, most valiant of the gods, splendid, the goddess Ištar-of-Uruk, august princess who has taken (unto herself all) divine offices of highest rank (and) has gathered to herself (all) ordinances, beloved, eminent, who looks upon the king — her favorite — with steady favor, (5) makes his reign lengthy, (and) bestows on him power and victory, empress of the world, most exalted of the gods, who dwells in Enirgalana (“House, Prince of Heaven”) — which is inside Eanna — lady of Uruk, great lady, his lady:
Esarhaddon, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad; the one to whom the god Aššur has stretched out his hand, permanently selected by the god Enlil, who was chosen by the god Marduk, favorite of the goddess Irnini; (10) who from his childhood trusted in the gods Aššur, Anu, Enlil, Ea, Sîn, Šamaš, Adad, Marduk, Nabû, Nergal, and Ištar, the great gods, his lords, (who) allowed him to attain his desire, (the one who) recognized their power, (the one) over whom (the gods) extended their eternal protection in order to appease their divine heart(s) and set their mind(s) at rest; (the one who) by the might of the gods Aššur, Bēl (Marduk), the Son-of-Bēl (Nabû), and Ištar, the gods, his helpers, ruled over all lands and (15) made all rulers submissive to him; the one who (re)constructed the temple of the god Aššur, (re)built Esagil and Babylon, renovated Eanna, completed the sanctuaries and cult centers, (and) (re)confirmed (their) sattukku offerings; the king during the days of whose reign, the great lord, the god Marduk, became reconciled to Babylon (and again) took up his residence in Esagil, his palace; (20) the one who made the god Great-Anu enter into his city Dēr and his temple Edimgalkalama (“House, Great Bond of the Land”) and had (him) sit upon (his) eternal dais; (the one who) restored the splendid appearance of the great gods who had rushed to Assyria, returned them from Assyria to their (proper) places and (re)confirmed their income; wise prince, expert who knows every craft, who (25) constantly established appropriate procedures in the great cult centers (and) has purification rites performed correctly; son of Sennacherib, king of the world (and) king of Assyria; descendant of Sargon (II), king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, (and) king of the land of Sumer and Akkad; descendant of the eternal line of Bēl-bāni, son of Adasi, king of Assyria; precious scion of Baltil (Aššur), (one of) royal lineage (and) ancient stock —
When Eanna, the temple of highest rank, beloved of the goddess Ištar, my lady, which a previous king had built, became old and its walls buckled, I sought its (original) emplacement, removed its dilapidated parts, (and) surveyed its (entire) foundation. I completely (re)built (it) with the work of the god Kulla according to its ancient specifications (and) raised its top (as high) as a mountain.
May the goddess Ištar, supreme lady, look upon this work with pleasure and may a good word for me be set upon her lips! May she make my weapons prevail over all (my) enemies!
If at any time in the future, during the days of the reign of some future ruler, this work falls into disrepair and becomes dilapidated, may (that ruler) seek out its (original) emplacement (and) repair its dilapidated parts! May he anoint an inscription written in my name with oil, make an offering, (and) set (it) back in its place! The gods will (then) hear his prayers. He will lengthen (his) days (and) enlarge (his) family.
(But as for) the one who by some crafty device destroys an inscription written in my name or changes its position, may the goddess Ištar, great lady, glare at him angrily and make his name (and) his descendant(s) disappear from every land!
For the goddess Ištar-of-Uruk, sovereign of heaven and netherworld, most valiant of the gods, august, supreme lady, who has gathered to herself (all) divine offices of highest rank, the one into whose hand all purification rites are appointed, empress of the goddesses, whose words are pre-eminent in heaven and netherworld, goddess of war and battle, who goes at the side of the king, her favorite, (and) slays his foes, who dwells in Enirgalana (“House, Prince of Heaven) — which is inside Eanna — lady of Uruk, great lady, his lady:
Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad; respectful king who is assiduous toward the sanctuaries of the great gods; who reveres the lord of lords; the one who (re)constructed the temple of the god Aššur, (re)built Esagil and Babylon, provided for Ezida, renovated Eanna, completed the sanctuaries of cult centers, (and) constantly established appropriate procedures in them; son of Sennacherib, king of the world (and) king of Assyria; descendant of Sargon (II), king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, (and) king of the land of Sumer and Akkad —
Enirgalana (“House, Prince of Heaven”), the cella of the goddess Ištar, my lady, which is inside Eanna, which a previous king had built, became old and dilapidated. I sought its (original) emplacement (and) repaired its dilapidated parts with baked bricks from a (ritually) pure kiln. I grasped the hands of the goddess Ištar-of-Uruk, great lady, brought (her) inside, (and) caused (her) to take up residence (there) forever. I offered splendid offerings and made her doorbolt extremely fine.
O goddess Ištar-of-Uruk, august lady, when you are happily dwelling inside that cella, may a good word for me — Esarhaddon, king of Assyria — be set upon your lips! Determine as my fate a long life, fullness of old age, good health, and happiness! Come to my side in war and battle so that I may squash all my enemies like ants!
If at any time in the future, during the reign of some future ruler, this cella falls into disrepair, may (that ruler) repair its dilapidated state! May he write my name with his name! May he anoint with oil an inscription written in my name, make an offering, (and) set (that inscription) with an inscription written in his name! The gods will (then) hear his prayers.
(But as for) the one who erases my inscribed name by some crafty device, destroys my (royal) inscription, or changes its position, may the goddess Ištar-of-Uruk glare at him angrily and determine a bad fate for him! May she make his name (and) his descendant(s) disappear from the land and have no pity on him!
For the goddess Nanāya, veiled one of the goddesses, who is adorned with attractiveness and joy and full of glamour, splendid daughter of the god Anu, whose lordship is supreme among all ladies, eminent spouse of the god Muzibsâ, praised sekretu, beloved of his majesty, compassionate goddess, who goes to the help of the king who reveres her, who prolongs his reign, who dwells in Eḫiliana (“House, Luxuriance of Heaven”) — which is inside Eanna — queen of Uruk, great lady, his lady:
Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad; respectful king who is assiduous toward the sanctuaries of the great gods; who reveres the lord of lords; the one who (re)constructed the temple of the god Aššur, (re)built Esagil and Babylon, provided for Ezida, renovated Eanna, completed the sanctuaries of cult centers, (and) constantly established appropriate procedures in them; son of Sennacherib, king of the world (and) king of Assyria; descendant of Sargon (II), king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, (and) king of the land of Sumer and Akkad —
Eḫiliana (“House, Luxuriance of Heaven”), the cella of the goddess Nanāya, my lady, which is inside Eanna, which a previous king had built, became old and dilapidated. I sought its (original) ground-plan (and) repaired its dilapidated parts with baked bricks from a (ritually) pure kiln. I grasped the hands of the goddess Nanāya, great lady, brought (her) inside, and caused (her) to take up residence (there) forever. I offered splendid offerings and made her doorbolt extremely fine.
O goddess Nanāya, august lady, when you are happily dwelling inside that cella, speak well of me — Esarhaddon, the prince who reveres you — before the god Nabû, your husband! Determine as my fate a long life, fullness of old age, good health, and happiness! Make the foundation of my royal throne as secure as a great mountain! Establish my reign as firm as heaven and netherworld!
If at any time in the future, during the reign of some future ruler, this cella falls into disrepair, may (that ruler) repair its dilapidated state! May he write my name with his name! May he anoint with oil an inscription written in my name, make an offering, (and) set (that inscription) with an inscription written in his name! The gods will (then) hear his prayers.
(But as for) the one who erases my inscribed name by some crafty device, destroys an inscription written in my name, or changes its position, may the goddess Nanāya, supreme lady, glare at him angrily and determine a bad fate for him! May she make his name (and) his descendant(s) disappear from the land and have no pity on him!
For the goddess Nanāya, queen of Uruk, great lady, his lady:
Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad; who is assiduous toward the sanctuaries of the great gods; the one who (re)constructed the temple of the god Aššur, (re)built Esagil and Babylon, (5) renovated Eanna, completed the sanctuaries of all of the cult centers, (and) constantly established appropriate procedures in them; the one who conquered from the Upper Sea to the Lower Sea (and) the one who made all rulers submissive to him; son of Sennacherib, king of Assyria; descendant of Sargon (II), king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, (and) king of the land of Sumer and Akkad —
Eḫiliana (“House, Luxuriance of Heaven”), the cella of the goddess Nanāya, my lady, which Nazi-Maruttaš, king of Babylon, had built, (and which) Erība-Marduk, king of Babylon, had shored up, became old and dilapidated. (15) I sought its (original) emplacement (and) repaired its dilapidated parts with baked bricks from a (ritually) pure kiln. I grasped the hands of the goddess Nanāya, my lady, brought (her) inside, (and) caused (her) to take up residence (there) forever.
When the goddess Nanāya looks upon this work with pleasure, may a good word for me — Esarhaddon, king of Assyria (and) king of Babylon — be set upon her lips before the god Nabû, my lord!
(But as for) the one who erases my inscribed name by some crafty device, destroys my (royal) inscription, or changes its position, may the goddess Nanāya glare at him angrily and make his name (and) his descendant(s) disappear!
For the goddess Ištar of Uruk, lady of the lands: Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, (5) governor of Babylon, (and) king of the four quarters, son of Sennacherib, king of the world (and) king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of the world (and) (10) king of Assyria, renovated Eanna (“House of Heaven”), the temple of highest rank, for the sake of his life, and made (it) shine like daylight.
For the goddess Ištar (of Uruk), lady of the lands: Esarhaddon, king of Assyria (and) king of Babylon, renovated Eanna (“House of Heaven”), the temple of highest rank, for the sake of his life, and made (it) shine like daylight.
For the goddess Ištar of Uruk, lady of Eanna, lady of the lands, his lady: Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, governor of Babylon, (5) king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, son of Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria, descendant of Sargon (II), king of the world, king of Assyria, renovated Eanna, (10) the temple of highest rank, and made (it) shine like daylight.
... ... ... ... the sun ... heart was angry ... ...... (i′ 5′) ... ... ... I raised and ... Imgur-Enlil ... ... ... ... a wall a king ... to be as secure as a great mountain for far-off days.
... oath ... ... to ... he placed and ... the people. He built their ... ... and ... over ... (ii′ 5′) (As for) Edurgina, the dwelling of the god Bēl-ṣarbi that is inside of Baṣ, he took its ... and built (it) anew. The gods Bēl-ṣarbi, Nabû and Marduk, (and) Ninsaggirgi and Dumuzi, (ii′ 10′) the gods living in it, they raised up their ....
The gods Ea and Asalluḫi, by their exalted wisdom,
to be as secure as a great mountain for far-off days. cast bronze ... he oversaw its smelting and (i′ 5) examined ... He built from its foundations to its parapets, ... all of its copings ... ...... Cutha,
The gods Ea and Asalluḫi, by their exalted wisdom, opened their mouth(s) with “the washing of the mouth” (and) “the opening of the mouth” (rites) and had (them) dwell on (ii′ 5) their pure pedestal(s) in their lofty cellas for all time. The one who expanded the cult centers, enlarged the temples of the great gods, which from ancient times ... ... ...
Through their good deeds, may the god Marduk, the great god, my lord, ... the foundation of their royal throne ... ... ...
... king ... ... I settled ... in a peaceful dwelling... ... mountain, my lord ... ... ... that road, property of/that ...... ... of Esagil and Babylon ....
... ... I brought them in ... ... ... ... my gifts... he received ... ... (and) he ... in the land they made ... disappear ....
(No translation possible)
For the god Marduk, king of all the Igīgū gods and Anunnakū gods, creator of heaven and netherworld, who establishes archetypes (and) dwells in Esagil, lord of Babylon, great lord, my lord:
I, Ashurbanipal, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world); son of Esarhaddon, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, viceroy of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, who (re)settled Babylon, (re)built Esagil, renovated the sanctuaries of all the cult centers, constantly established appropriate procedures in them, and (re)confirmed their interrupted regular offerings, (who) restored the rites (and) rituals according to the old pattern; grandson of Sennacherib, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, I —
During my reign, the great lord, the god Marduk, entered Babylon amidst rejoicing and took up his residence in the eternal Esagil. I (re)confirmed the regular offerings for Esagil and the gods of Babylon. I (re-)established the privileged status of Babylon (and) appointed Šamaš-šuma-ukīn, my favorite brother, to the kingship of Babylon in order that the strong might not harm the weak. I decorated Esagil (“House whose Top is High”) with silver, gold, (and) precious stones and made Eumuša (“House of Counsel”) glisten like the stars (lit. “writing”) of the firmament.
At that time, (with regard to) Imgur-Enlil (“The God Enlil Showed Favor”), the (city) wall of Babylon, (and) Nēmet-Enlil (“Bulwark of the God Enlil”), its outer wall, which had become old and buckled (and) collapsed, in order to increase the security of Esagil and the (other) sanctuaries of Babylon, with the strength of my labor forces I had Nēmet-Enlil, its outer wall, built quickly anew with the work of the god Kulla and I refitted its gates. I had (new) doors made and hung (them) in its gateways.
O (you) future prince, during whose reign this work falls into disrepair, question skilled craftsmen! (Re)build Imgur-Enlil, the (city) wall, (and) Nēmet-Enlil, the outer wall, according to their ancient specifications! Look at my royal inscription, anoint (it) with oil, offer a sacrifice, (and) place (my royal inscription) with your (own) royal inscription! The god Marduk will (then) listen to your prayers.
(But) as for the one who destroys my inscribed name or the name of my favorite (brother) by some crafty device, (or) does not place my royal inscription with his (own) royal inscription, may the god Marduk, king of everything, glare at him angrily and make his name (and) his descendant(s) disappear from the lands!
Ashurbanipal, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), king of kings, prince who has no rival, who rules from the Upper Sea to the Lower Sea and has subjugated all rulers; (5) son of Esarhaddon, great king, (mighty king), (king of the world), (king of Assyria), (viceroy of Babylon), king of the land of Sumer and Akkad; grandson of Sennacherib, (great king), mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, I —
I completed the work on Esagil which (my) father who had engendered me had not finished. I (re)confirmed the regular offerings for Esagil and the gods of Babylon. I (re-)established the privileged status of Babylon (and) appointed Šamas-šuma-ukīn, my favorite brother, to the kingship of Babylon in order that the strong might not harm the weak.
(But) as for the one who ... destroys my royal inscription, or changes its position, may the god Ea, king of the Watery Abyss (apsû), speak evil of him before the god Bēl (Marduk) (and) the goddess Bēltīia (Zarpanītu) and make his name (and) his descendant(s) disappear from the lands!
Ashurbanipal, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), king of kings, prince who has no rival, who rules from the Upper Sea to the Lower Sea and has subjugated all rulers; (5) son of Esarhaddon, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, viceroy of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad; grandson of Sennacherib, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria —
I completed the work on Esagil which (my) father who had engendered me had not finished. I (re)confirmed the regular offerings for Esagil and the gods of Babylon. (10) I (re-)established the privileged status of Babylon (and) appointed Šamaš-<šuma>-ukīn, my favorite brother, to the kingship of Babylon in order that the strong might not harm the weak.
At that time, I had Eturkalama, the temple of the goddess Ištar-of-Babylon, (re)built anew.
May the goddess Ištar-of-Babylon, the august lady, look upon my good deeds with pleasure and may she say good things about me daily before the god Bēl (Marduk) and the goddess Bēltīia (Zarpanītu)! May she determine as my fate a long life (and) make my reign as firm as heaven and netherworld! Moreover, with regard to Šamaš-<šuma>-ukīn, king of Babylon, my favorite brother, may his days be long and may he experience the fullness of old age!
(But) as for the one who erases my inscribed name or the name of my favorite (brother) by some crafty device, (or) destroys my royal inscription, or changes its position, may the goddess Ištar-of-Babylon speak evil of him before the god Bēl (and) the goddess Bēltīia (and) make his name (and) his descendant(s) disappear from the lands!
Ashurbanipal, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), king of kings, prince who has no rival, who rules from the Upper Sea to the Lower Sea and has subjugated all rulers; (5) son of Esarhaddon, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, viceroy of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad; grandson of Sennacherib, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, I —
I completed the work on Esagil which (my) father who had engendered me had not finished. I (re)confirmed the regular offerings for Esagil and the gods of Babylon. (10) I (re-)established the privileged status of Babylon (and) appointed Šamaš-šuma-ukīn, my favorite brother, to the kingship of Babylon in order that the strong might not harm the weak.
At that time, I had Emaḫ, the temple of the goddess Ninmaḫ which is inside Babylon, (re)built anew.
On account of this, may the goddess Ninmaḫ, the august lady, look upon my good deeds with pleasure and say good things about me daily before the god Bēl (Marduk) and the goddess Bēltīia (Zarpanītu)! May she determine as my fate a long life (and) make my reign as firm as heaven and netherworld! Moreover, with regard to Šamaš-šuma-ukīn, king of Babylon, my favorite brother, may his days be long and may he experience the fullness of old age!
(But) as for the one who erases my inscribed name or the name of my favorite (brother) by some crafty device, (or) destroys my royal inscription, or changes its position, may the goddess Ninmaḫ speak evil of him before the god Bēl (and) the goddess Bēltīia and make his name (and) his descendant(s) disappear from the lands!
Ashurbanipal, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), king of kings, prince who has no rival; son of Esarhaddon, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, (5) viceroy of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad; grandson of Sennacherib, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, I —
During my reign, the great lord, the god Marduk, who during the reign of a previous king had resided in Baltil (Aššur) in the presence of the father who had created him, (10) entered Babylon amidst rejoicing. I (re)confirmed the regular offerings for Esagil and the gods of Babylon. I (re–)established the privileged status of Babylon (and) appointed Šamaš-šuma-ukīn, my favorite brother, (15) to the kingship of Babylon in order that the strong might not harm the weak. I completed the work on Esagil which my father had not finished.
At that time, I (re-)erected the platforms and daises of all of Esagil in their (original) positions according to their ancient specifications.
On account of this, may the god Marduk, the great lord, look upon my good deeds with pleasure and determine as my fate a long life, fullness of old age, good health, and happiness! Moreover, with regard to Šamaš-šuma-ukīn, king of Babylon, my favorite brother, may his days be long and may he be fully satisfied with (his) good fortune!
If at any time in the future, during the days of the reign of some future prince, this work falls into disrepair, may (that prince) repair its dilapidated state! May he write my name with his (own) name! May he look at my royal inscription, anoint (it) with oil, offer a sacrifice, (and) set (my royal inscription back) in its place! The god Marduk will (then) hearken to his prayers.
(But) as for the one who erases my inscribed name, (or) destroys my royal inscription, or changes its position, may the great lord, the god Marduk, glare at him angrily and make his name (and) his descendant(s) disappear from the lands!
I, Ashurbanipal, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), king of kings, prince who has no rival, who by the command of the gods Aššur, Šamaš, and Marduk rules from the Upper Sea (10) to the Lower Sea and has subjugated all rulers, who provides for Esagil, the palace of the gods — whose doorbolt I made glisten like the stars (lit. “writing”) of the firmament —, who repaired the damaged parts of all their sanctuaries, (who) established (my) protection over all cult centers, whose deeds are pleasing to all the gods (and) (20) whose shepherdship is sweet to the black-headed people; son of Esarhaddon, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, viceroy of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, who (re)settled Babylon, (re)built Esagil, renovated the sanctuaries of all the cult centers, constantly established appropriate procedures in them, and (re)confirmed their interrupted offerings, (who) restored the rites and rituals according (30) to the old pattern; grandson of Sennacherib, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, I —
During my reign, the great lord, the god Marduk, who during the reign of a previous king (40) had resided in Baltil (Aššur) in the presence of the father who created him, entered Babylon amidst rejoicing. I (re)confirmed the regular offerings for Esagil and the gods of Babylon. I (re–)established the privileged status of Babylon (and) (50) in order that the strong might not harm the weak, I appointed Šamaš-šuma-ukīn, my favorite brother, to the kingship of Babylon. I completed the work on Esagil which my father had not finished. I roofed it with immense beams of cedar and cypress, the produce of (60) Mount Amanus and Mount Lebanon. I had doors made of boxwood, musukkannu-wood, juniper, and cedar and I hung (them) in its gates. I had vessels made of gold, silver, bronze, iron, wood, and (precious) stones and I placed (them) inside it.
At that time, I had Ekarzagina, the shrine of the god Ea which is inside Esagil, (re)built anew.
May the god Ea, king of the Watery Abyss (apsû), look upon this work with pleasure and may a good word for me — Ashurbanipal, king of Assyria, prince who reveres him — be set (70) upon his lips! May he determine as my fate a long life, fullness of old age, good health, and happiness! May he make the foundation of my royal throne as secure as a mountain! May he make my reign as firm as heaven and netherworld! Moreover, with regard to Šamaš-šuma-ukīn, king of Babylon, my favorite brother, may his days be long and may he be fully satisfied with (his) good fortune!
If at any time in the future, during the days of the reign of some future prince, this work falls into disrepair, may (that prince) repair its dilapidated state! May he look at my royal statue, (80) anoint (it) with oil, offer a sacrifice, (and) place (my statue) with his (own) statue! The god Ea will (then) listen to his prayers.
(But) as for the one who erases my inscribed name, (or) destroys my royal statue, or changes its position and does not place (it) with his (own) statue, may the god Ea, (90) august lord, glare at him angrily, overthrow his royal rule, and take away his sovereignty. May he (Ea) make his name (and) his descendant(s) disappear from the lands and have no pity on him!
For the god Marduk, his lord: Ashurbanipal, king of the world (and) king of Assyria, in order to ensure his good health (5) had baked bricks made anew for Esagil and Etemenanki.
For the god Marduk, his lord: Ashurbanipal, king of the world (and) king of Assyria, son of Esarhaddon, (5) king of the world, king of Assyria, (and) king of Babylon, had baked bricks made anew for Etemenanki.
For the god Asari, great lord, his lord: Ashurbanipal, king of the world (and) king of Assyria, son of Esarhaddon, king of the world, king of Assyria, (and) king of Babylon, for the sake of his life had Etemenanki constructed anew.
For the god Marduk, his lord: Ashurbanipal, son of Esarhaddon, king of the world (and) king of Assyria had baked bricks made anew for Etemenanki.
For the god Marduk, his lord: Ashurbanipal, king of the world (and) king of Assyria, for the sake of his life had baked bricks made anew for Etemenanki.
To the god Nabû ... commander of the gods, eminent, exalted, splendid, ... who bears the tablet of the fates of the gods, who controls the omens ... ... who gives advice to the gods of heaven and netherworld,... whose weapons cannot be equaled, (5) ... whose lordship is supreme, who dwells in Ezida — the proper temple, (located) in Borsippa, the awesome cult center — great lord, my lord:
I, Ashurbanipal, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world); son of Esarhaddon, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, viceroy of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, who (re)settled Babylon, (re)built Esagil, renovated the sanctuaries of all cult centers, (10) constantly established appropriate procedures in them, and (re)confirmed their interrupted regular offerings, (who) restored the rites (and) rituals according to the old pattern; grandson of Sennacherib, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, I —
During my reign, the great lord, the god Marduk, entered Babylon amidst rejoicing and took up his residence in the eternal Esagil. I (re)confirmed the regular offerings for Esagil (15) and the gods of Babylon. I (re-)established the privileged status of Babylon (and) appointed Šamaš-šuma-ukīn, my favorite brother, to the kingship of Babylon in order that the strong might not harm the weak. I decorated Esagil with silver, gold, (and) precious stones and made Eumuša glisten like the stars (lit. “writing”) of the firmament.
At that time, (with regard to) 1ābi-supūršu, the (city) wall of Borsippa, which had become old and (20) buckled (and) collapsed, in order to increase the security of Ezida and the (other) sanctuaries of Borsippa, with the strength of my labour forces I had Ṭābi-supūršu, its (city) wall, built quickly anew with the work of the god Kulla and refitted its gates. I had (new) doors made and hung (them) in its gateways.
O (you) future prince, during whose reign this work falls into disrepair, question skilled craftsmen! (Re)build Ṭābi-supūršu, the (city) wall of Borsippa, according to its ancient specifications! (25) Look at my royal inscription, anoint (it) with oil, offer a sacrifice, (and) place (my royal inscription) with your (own) royal inscription! The god Nabû will (then) listen to your prayers.
(But) as for the one who destroys my inscribed name or the name of my favorite (brother) by some crafty device, (or) does not place my royal inscription with his (own) royal inscription, may the god Nabû, (...), glare at him angrily and make his name (and) his descendant(s) disappear from the lands!
I, Ashurbanipal, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), king of kings, prince who has no rival, who by the command of the gods Aššur, Šamaš, (5) and Marduk rules from the Upper Sea to the Lower Sea and has subjugated all rulers, who provides for Esagil, the palace of the gods — whose doorbolt I made glisten like the stars (lit. “writing”) of the firmament — who repaired the damaged parts (10) of all their sanctuaries, (who) established (my) protection over all cult centers, the one whose deeds are pleasing to all the gods (and) whose shepherdship is sweet to the black-headed people; son of Esarhaddon, (15) king of the world, king of Assyria, viceroy of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, who (re)settled Babylon, (re)built Esagil, renovated the sanctuaries of all the cult centers, constantly established appropriate procedures in them, (and) (20) (re)confirmed their interrupted regular offerings, (who) restored the rites and rituals according to the old pattern; grandson of Sennacherib, king of the world, king of Assyria, I —
During my reign, the great lord, the god Marduk, who during the reign of a previous king (25) had resided in Baltil (Aššur) in the presence of the father who created him, entered Babylon amidst rejoicing. I (re)confirmed the regular offerings for Esagil and the gods of Babylon. I (re–)established the privileged status of Babylon (and) (30) in order that the strong might not harm the weak I appointed Šamaš-šuma-ukīn, my favorite brother, to the kingship of Babylon.
At that time, (with regard to) the enclosure wall of Ezida (“True House”) which had become old and whose foundation had become weak, during my reign I renovated its dilapidated sections and made (it) high as a mountain.
On account of this, may the god Nabû, the august lord, look upon my good deeds with pleasure and (40) may a good word for me — Ashurbanipal, prince who reveres him — be set upon his lips! May he determine as my fate a long life, fullness of old age, good health, and happiness! May he make the foundation of my royal throne as secure as a mountain! (45) May he make my reign as firm as heaven and netherworld! Moreover, with regard to Šamaš-šuma-ukīn, king of Babylon, my favorite brother, may his days be long and may he be fully satisfied with (his) good fortune!
If at any time in the future, during the days of the reign of some future prince, this work falls into disrepair, may (that prince) repair its dilapidated state! May he look at (55) my royal statue, anoint (it) with oil, offer a sacrifice, (and) place (my statue) with his (own) statue! The god Nabû will (then) listen to his prayers.
(But) as for the one who erases my inscribed name, (or) destroys my royal statue, or changes its position and (70) does not place (it) with his (own) statue, may the god Nabû, supreme lord, glare at him angrily, overthrow (75) his royal rule, and take away his sovereignty! May he (Nabû) make his name (and) his descendant(s) disappear from the lands and have no pity on him!
Ashurbanipal, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), king of kings, prince who has no rival, who by the command of the gods, his helpers, rules from the Upper Sea to the Lower Sea and has subjugated all rulers; son of Esarhaddon, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, viceroy of Babylon, (5) king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, who (re)settled Babylon, (re)built Esagil, renovated the sanctuaries of all the cult centers, constantly established appropriate procedures in them, and (re)confirmed their interrupted regular offerings; grandson of Sennacherib, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, I —
During my reign, the great lord, the god Marduk, entered Babylon amidst rejoicing and took up his residence in the eternal Esagil. (10) I (re)confirmed the regular offerings for Esagil and the gods of Babylon. I (re-)established the privileged status of Babylon (and) appointed Šamaš-šuma-ukīn, my favorite brother, to the kingship of Babylon in order that the strong might not harm the weak. I completed the unfinished work on Esagil. I decorated Esagil with silver, gold, (and) precious stones and made Eumuša glisten like the stars (lit. “writing”) of the firmament. I restored the damage done to all the sanctuaries. I extended (my) protection over all the cult centers.
At that time, I sought the (original) emplacement of Ebabbar, which is inside Sippar, the temple of the god Šamaš, the great lord, my lord, which had become old, buckled, and collapsed. I had (it) (re)built anew with the work of the god Kulla and raised its top (as high) as a mountain.
On account of this, may the god Šamaš, great judge of the gods, great lord, my lord, look upon my good deeds with pleasure! May he determine (20) for me — Ashurbanipal, king of Assyria, the prince who reveres him — as my fate, a long life, fullness of old age, good health, and happiness! Moreover, with regard to Šamaš-šuma-ukīn, the king of Babylon, my favorite (brother), may his days be long and may he be fully satisfied with (his) good fortune!
If at any time in the future, during the days of the reign of some future prince, this work falls into disrepair, may (that prince) renovate its dilapidated sections! May he write my name with his (own) name! May he look at my royal inscription, (25) anoint (it) with oil, offer a sacrifice, (and) place (my royal inscription) with his (own) royal inscription! The god Šamaš will (then) listen to his prayers.
(But) as for the one who erases my inscribed name or the name of my favorite (brother) by some crafty device, (or) does not write my name with his (own) name, (or) destroys my royal inscription, (or) does not place (my royal inscription) with his (own) royal inscription, may the god Šamaš, lord of the upper world and the netherworld, glare at him angrily and make his name (and) his descendant(s) disappear from the lands!
For the goddess Ištar-of-Uruk, sovereign of heaven and netherworld, most powerful of the gods, august one, who executes the command she gives in the east and in the west, the fierce goddess of battle who whirls around in the melee like a dust storm, who goes at the side of the king, her favorite, (and) slays his foes, (5) mistress of the lands, who has gathered to herself (all) divine offices (and) administers correctly all purification rites, who dwells in Enirgalanim — which is inside Eanna — great lady, his lady:
Ashurbanipal, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, king of the four quarters (of the world), king of kings, prince who has no rival, who rules from the Upper Sea to the Lower Sea and has subjugated all rulers; who imposed the yoke of his rulership upon the city Tyre — which is in the midst of the Upper Sea — and Dilmun — which is in the midst of the Lower Sea — (10) so that they bore his yoke (lit. “pulled his yoke-rope”); whose deeds are pleasing to all the gods (and) whose shepherdship is sweet to the black-headed people; during whose reign the god Adad made his rain (and) the god Ea his springs last a long time for his land, (who) continually seeks after his people with prosperity and wealth, whose people are all in a state of prosperity, and whose settlements rejoice; son of Esarhaddon, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, viceroy of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, who (re)settled Babylon, (re)built Esagil, (15) renovated the sanctuaries of all the cult centers, and constantly established appropriate procedures in them; grandson of Sennacherib, (who was) also great king, mighty king, king of the world, (and) king of Assyria —
During my reign, the great lord, the god Marduk, entered Babylon amidst rejoicing. I (re)confirmed the regular offerings for Esagil and the gods of Babylon. I (re-)established the privileged status of Babylon (and) appointed Šamaš-šuma-ukīn, my favorite brother, to the kingship of Babylon in order that the strong might not harm the weak. I completed the work on Esagil which had not been finished. (20) I decorated Esagil with silver, gold, and precious stones and made Eumuša glisten like the stars (lit. “writing”) of the firmament. I repaired the damaged parts of all their sanctuaries (and) extended (my) protection over all cult centers.
At that time, (with regard to) the enclosure wall of Eanna, the perimeter ... which had become old, buckled, (and) a heap of ruin, I sought their (original) emplacement and had (them) (re)built anew. I completed (them), raising their tops (as high) as a mountain.
On account of this, may the goddess Ištar-of-Uruk, the great lady, look upon this work with pleasure and may a good word for me — Ashurbanipal, king of Assyria (and) prince who reveres her— be set upon her lips! May she determine as my fate a long life, fullness of old age, good health, (and) happiness! Moreover, with regard to Šamaš-šuma-ukīn, king of Babylon, my favorite brother, may his days be long (and) may he be fully satisfied with (his) good fortune!
May any future prince, during the days of whose reign this work falls into disrepair, renovate its dilapidated sections! May he write my name with his (own) name, look at my royal inscription, anoint (it) with oil, offer a sacrifice, (and) place (my royal inscription) with his (own) royal inscription! The goddess Ištar-of-Uruk will (then) listen to his prayers.
(But) as for the one who does not write my name with his name, (or) destroys my royal inscription, or changes its position and does not place (it) with his (own) royal inscription, may the goddess Ištar-of-Uruk, great lady, glare at him angrily, make his name (and) his descendant(s) disappear from the lands, and have no pity on him!
For the god Enlil, king of the gods, lord of the heaven and netherworld, prince ..., one who renders decisions, whose order cannot be changed, foremost of the Igīgū gods, hero of the Anunnakū gods, who rules ..., one who holds the lead-rope of every(one), one who makes opposing forces agree, lord of the lands, wisest of the gods, one who dwells in Ekur which is inside Nippur, (the great lord), his lord:
Ashurbanipal, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, ... king who has no equal in all the lands; son of Esarhaddon, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria; grandson of Sennacherib, (who was) also great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria; (10) king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, vice-regent for the gods Aššur, Enlil and Ninurta, one who provides for the cult centers, ... sanctuaries —
In order to ensure his good health, to prolong his days, to make his appearance (lit. “body”) radiant, to ensure the well-being of his offspring, so that he stand (victoriously) over his enemies, that his reign endure, that he lead (his people) aright with his staff, that his rule please his land, (and) that he guide his people in abundant prosperity,
(With regard to) Egigunû, the ziqqurat of Nippur, whose foundation is made secure on the breast of the Watery Abyss (apsû), whose enclosure wall had become old and eroded, I repaired its dilapidated section(s) with baked bricks from a (ritually) pure kiln, and completed its structure. I had it built anew with the work of the god Kulla and made it shine like daylight. I raised its top (as high) as a mountain and made its appearance resplendent.
On account of this, when the god Enlil, king of the gods, chief god of the gods, great lord, (his lord), looks upon Egigunû, the sign of the lands, with pleasure, may he (Enlil) constantly bless the kingship of Ashurbanipal — king of Assyria, true shepherd who reveres his great divinity — (and) keep his reign safe until far-off days! May he cause him to grasp a staff of shepherdship which makes opposing forces agree! May he make his shepherdship pleasant to his land! May he make (him) stand (victoriously) over his enemy!
For the god Enlil, lord of the lands, his lord: Ashurbanipal, (5) his obedient shepherd, mighty king, king of the four quarters (of the world), (re)built Ekur, his beloved temple, with baked bricks.
For the god Enlil, king of the gods, sovereign of heaven (and) netherworld, prince (who decides) the fates, (5) his lord: Ashurbanipal, his obedient shepherd, mighty king, king of the world, (re)built Egigunû with baked bricks.
For the god Enlil, king of the gods, sovereign of heaven (and) netherworld, prince (who decides) the fates, (5) his lord: Ashurbanipal, his obedient shepherd, mighty king, king of the world, skillfully (re)built (10) with baked bricks ... within Eḫursaggalama, his ancient royal cella.
this work falls into disrepair ..., question skilled craftsmen! ... Rebuild (...), the temple of the goddess Ištar according to its ancient specifications! ... The goddess Ištar-(of-Akkad) will (then) listen to your prayers. Look at my royal inscription, anoint (it) with oil, offer a sacrifice, (and) set (my royal inscription) with your (own) royal inscription!
(But) as for the one who erases my inscribed name by some crafty device, (or) does not write my name with his name, (or) destroys my royal inscription, (or) does not set my royal inscription with his (own) royal inscription ... ... the goddess Ištar-of-Akkad will ...
For the god Enlil, (...) his lord: Ashurbanipal, king of the world, king of Assyria, (...) king of the four quarters (of the world), had (this) (...) built for the sake of his life.
For the god Nergal, mightiest of the gods, most overpowering of the gods, the supreme, perfect, (and) noble sovereign of his brother(s), the one who dwells in (the temple) Ešaḫula, the lord of Sirara, his lord:
Ashurbanipal, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria; son of Esarhaddon, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, (5) king of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad; grandson of Sennacherib, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria —
In order to ensure his good health, he enlarged the courtyard of (the temple) Ešaḫula with baked bricks from a (ritually) pure kiln and made its processional way shine like daylight.
... ... in Esagil .... When that light ... the good of Ashurbanipal, king of the lands .... Let him daily ... (...).
For the god Sîn of heaven, lion of the gods (and) king of the Enlil (circle of) gods, his lord:
Sîn-balāssu-iqbi, viceroy of Ur, son of Ningal-iddin, (who was also) viceroy of Ur, who provides for Ekišnugal —
(With regard to) Etemennigurru, whose (enclosure) wall had collapsed in the distant past, whose foundation terrace had lain waste, (and) whose foundations were covered over, I sought the location of (15) its forgotten gate(s). I put its foundation inscription inside a box and raised its (the temple’s) top. I inlaid with silver (20) a door of boxwood, wood of finest quality from a distant mountain, fixed with a copper peg, whose band(s) were strong, (whose) bottom was of gold, (25) (whose) door bolt was of shining silver, (and whose) bar and pivot were of strong copper, in order that it might stand forever fixed in the doorway of the “secret house,” the house of divination.
May the god Sîn (and) the goddess Ningal, the god(s), my helpers, destroy the name of anyone who erases my inscription or changes its position!
For the god Sîn of heaven, lion of the gods (and) king of the Enlil (circle of) gods, his lord:
Sîn-balāssu-iqbi, viceroy of Ur, son of Ningal-iddin, (10) (who was also) viceroy of Ur, (re)built anew Etemennigurru, his beloved temple.
(For) the god Nanna, king of heaven (and) netherworld: in order to ensure the good health of Ashurbanipal, king of kings, his lord, (5) Sîn-balāssu-iqbi, viceroy of Ur (and) Eridu, who provides for Ekišnugal, the shining shrine of the Watery Abyss (apsû), (re)built anew (10) Elugalgalgasisa, his beloved temple.
(For) the god Nanna, his lord, ... of Ashurbanipal, king of the world, Sîn-balāssu-iqbi, (5) viceroy of Ur (and) Eridu, for the sake of his life (re)built Elugalgalgasisa anew.
(For) the god Nanna, king of the Enlil (circle of) gods, his lord: Sîn-balāssu-iqbi, viceroy of Ur, (5) who provides for Eridu, built Eušumgalana, the station of the goddess Ninkasi.
(For) the god Nanna, king of the Enlil (circle) of gods, his lord: Sîn-balāssu-iqbi, the viceroy of Ur, (5) who provides for Eridu, built Eešbanda, the abode of the goddess Šuzianna.
(For) the god Nanna, king of the Enlil (circle of) gods, his lord: Sîn-balāssu-iqbi, viceroy of Ur, (5) who provides for Eridu, built Eankikuga, the station of the god Kusu.
(For) the god Nanna, king of the Enlil (circle of) gods, his lord: Sîn-balāssu-iqbi, viceroy of Ur, (5) who provides for Eridu, built Eadgigi, the abode of the god Nusku.
(For) the god Nanna, king of the Enlil (circle of) gods, his lord: Sîn-balāssu-iqbi, viceroy of Ur, (5) who provides for Eridu, built Ekišibgalekura, the abode of the god Ninimma.
(For) the god Nanna, king of the Enlil (circle of) gods, his lord: Sîn-balāssu-iqbi, viceroy of Ur, (5) who provides for Eridu, built E...kuga, the abode/station of the god Ennugi.
(For) the god Nanna, king of the Enlil (circle of) gods, his lord: Sîn-balāssu-iqbi, viceroy of Ur, (5) who provides for Eridu, built Eanšar, his royal abode.
(For) the god Nanna, king of the Enlil (circle of) gods, his lord: Sîn-balāssu-iqbi, viceroy of Ur, (5) who provides for Eridu, built Ešaduga, the abode of his Enlilship.
(For) the god Nanna, king of the Enlil (circle of) gods, his lord: Sîn-balāssu-iqbi, viceroy of Ur, (5) who provides for Eridu, built Eašanamar, the abode of the god Enlil.
For the goddess Ningal, queen of Ekišnugal, divine Ninmenna (“Lady-of-the-Crown”), beloved of Ur, his lady:
Sîn-balāssu-iqbi, viceroy of Ur, built anew the Gipāru, the house of the supreme goddess, beloved wife of the god Sîn. After he constructed a statue, a (re-)creation of the goddess Ningal, (and) brought it into the house of the wise god, she took up residence in Enun, (which was) built (to be) her lordly abode.
For the goddess Ningal, august lady, queen of the goddesses, (most) valiant of the great gods:
In order to ensure the good health of Ashurbanipal, king of Assyria, mighty king, (and) king of the world, his lord, Sîn-balāssu-iqbi, son of Ningal-iddin, viceroy of Ur, Eridu and the Gurasimmu (tribe), (10) opened up (its) emplacement, (re)built (the well named) Puḫilituma, and established (it) for all time. He made inexhaustible spring water appear in it.
With regard to any (future) prince who (re)opens this well, may his days be long (and) his offspring extensive!
Copy from a baked brick from the debris of Ur, the work of Amar-Suen, king of Ur, (which) Sîn-balāssu-iqbi, viceroy of Ur, had discovered while looking for the ground-plan of Ekišnugal. Nabû-šuma-iddin, son of Iddin-Papsukkal, the lamentation-priest of the god Sîn, saw (it) and wrote (it) down for display.
(No translation warranted.)
To the god Marduk, venerable, splendid, the Enlil of the gods, most exalted of the gods, the one who directs all of the gods (and) holds the link between the Igīgū- and Anunnakū-gods, commander, honored god, king of the totality of heaven and netherworld, at whose mention the great gods fearfully attend his command
respectful, large of stature, one who grew up in the Watery Abyss (apsû), (whose) dignity is splendid, (whose) body is superior, (and whose) features are perfect, most capable of all (of the gods), one who knows everything, understands the will of the Watery Abyss, (and) comprehends the secret(s) of the lalgar, lord of Babylon, one who dwells in Esagil, great lord, lord of the universe:
Aššur-etel-ilāni, king of the world (and) king of Assyria, in order to ensure his good heath, so that his prayers be heard, and to overthrow his enemies presented (this) table of musukkannu-wood, a durable wood, which is mounted with red ṣāriru-gold ... artistically made by the skill of craftsmen, (and) suitable for the fitting things of pure food offerings
O god Marduk, great lord, when you look upon this table with pleasure, (and) when (this) table is set (and) regular, ceaseless offerings are presented, may the god Šulpaea, the lord of the table, speak well of Aššur-etel-ilāni, king of Assyria (and) your favorite ruler, before you!
Two qû (and) the three and one-third akalu (as) offerings; one pānu (and) one sūtu of dried figs from the maššartu-deliveries of the month Tašrītu. Nādin, son of Bēl-aḫḫē-iqīša.
Ulūlu (VI), eleventh day, third year.
For the god Marduk, supreme lord, august hero, lord of lords, exalted, wh(ose) figure is splendid (and who) is vastly superior to all of the (other) gods, bearer of the awe-inspiring, terrible radiance, clothed in splendor, (5) who drove off the god Kingu, defeated the angry sea, (and) overcame the evil ones, who dwells in Eešerke — which is inside Sippar-Aruru — great lord, his lord:
Aššur-etel-ilāni, king of the world (and) king of Assyria, son of Ashurbanipal, king of the world (and) king of Assyria, (10) had a scepter of red gold made which was (then) presented for his (Marduk’s) pure hands to grasp. He (Aššur-etel-ilāni) set (it) up forever inside Eešerke in order to ensure his good health, to prolong his days, to confirm his reign, to ensure the well-being of his descendant(s), to make his royal throne secure, (and) to ensure that his prayers are heard (and) his supplication(s) granted.
He established for (all) future days the freedom from taxation of those privileged to enter the temple, the collegium, those people, as many as there are, who look after his (Marduk’s) ways.
That which is (written) upon the gold scepter of the god Marduk.
For the god Uraš, august lord, fore most of the great gods of E-ibbi-Anum — the shrine (which is) worthy of honor — great lord, his lord:
Aššur-etel-ilāni, king of Assyria, who renovated the shrine(s) of the great gods, son of Ashurbanipal, king of Assyria, shepherd of the black-headed, renovated E-ibbi-Anum, the holy place which is inside Dilbat, the abode of the god Uraš and the goddess Ninegal. He (re)built (it) anew with baked bricks, the product of the god Baḫar and, with regard to the foundation of the well, he (re-)established its position as (it had been) in ancient times.
For future days he cleaned this entire wall (in order to make its water as pure) as (that of) the Tigris and < Euphrates> rivers, and (5) he established its water for the meals of the great gods. That water should be brought every day in good time for (their) meals. May they say good things about Aššur-etel-ilāni, the king, their favorite, to the deities Nabû, Marduk, Uraš, and Ninegal, who dwell in that temple. May his reign be long!
For the god Enlil, lord of the lands, his lord: Aššur-etel-ilāni, (5) his obedient shepherd, who provides for Nippur, supporter of Ekur, mighty king, king of the four quarters (of the world), (re)built (10) Ekur, his beloved temple with caked bricks.
The tomb of Šamaš-ibni, the Dakkurian, upon whom Aššur-etel-ilāni, king of Assyria, had pity, brought from Assyria to Bīt-Dakkūri, his (own) country, and laid to rest in a tomb inside his home of Dūru-ša-Ladīni (“Fortress of Ladīnu”).
Whoever you are, whether governor or commander or judge or prince, who is appointed in the land, do not harm this tomb or (its) bone(s)! (But rather) look after its position (and) extend (your) good protection over it! For (doing) this, my the god Marduk, the great lord, lengthen your reign, establish his good protection over you, (and) bless your name, your descendant(s), and your long life for all time!
(But) if that prince or governor or commandant or judge or viceroy who appears in the land harms this tomb or (its) bone(s), (or) changes its position, taking (it) to another place, (15) or (if) another person incites him to plan wicked things (against this tomb) and he listens (to him), may the god Marduk, the great lord, make his name, his descendant(s), his offspring, and his progeny disappear from (mention by) the mouth(s) of the people! May the god Nabû, who makes opposing forces agree, cut short the number of his days (lit. “the number of his long days”)! May the god Nergal not spare his life from malaria, plague, or slaughter!
Sennacherib, king of Assyria.
(Property) of Nabû-mukīn-apli, king of the world.
(Property) of Ninurta-kudurrī-uṣur, son of the king.
(Property) of Rīmūt-ilī, chief administrator of the temples ...
Rīmūt-ilī, son of the king.
(Property) of Mār-bīti-šuma-ibni, the sakrumaš-official.
(Property) of Ninurta-nādin-šumi, son of Šerik, the sakrumaš-official.
For the god Marduk, great lord, heroic, eminent, exalted, lord of everything, lord of lords, august judge who makes decisions for (all) the inhabited world, lord of (all) lands, lord of Babylon, the one who dwells in Esagila, his lord:
Marduk-zākir-šumi, king of the world, prince who reveres him, in order to ensure his good health (and) the well-being of his descendant(s), to prolong his days, to confirm his reign, to defeat his enemy, and to live in safety in his (the god Marduk’s) presence forever, had made and presented (to Marduk this) seal of shining lapis lazuli, which is duly (and) carefully manufactured with red gold, (as an item) fitting for his holy neck.
... their ... ... ...
... Babylon and Borsippa ...
... king of Babylon ... ...
... within the heavens the writing board (recording) the exemption of Babylon ...
... they speak with him; they anoint his head with oil ... ...
... while they watched, he descended to the earth ... ...
... the prince commissioned auxiliary troops (to protect) the exemption of Babylon and Borsippa ...
... he had (it) inscribed upon a canopy of ṣāriru-gold and set (it) up in the ‟Gate-of-Well-being,” the cella of the god Bēl ...
... in the disorder and trouble ...
... Babylon, the freedom and privileged status of Babylon ...
... he established. He inscribed (it) upon the gold canopy of the god Bēl and for the future ...
... and in the accession year of Marduk-zākir-šumi, king of Babylon ...
... king of the world, prince who reveres their great divinity, ... the exemption of Babylon ...
... on account of the rebellion and unrest in the land of Akkad were forgotten ...
... the exemption of Borsippa was not established; to change ... afterwards ...
the god Nabû ..., the judge who makes opposing sides agree, in the month of Nisan, on the eleventh day, the gate ...
... the goddess Zarpanītu entered and for the kingship of Marduk-zākir-šumi, king ...
... thus he asked but no one answered him. In the sixteenth year ...
... ... to complete, the omens ...
... ... because of the exemption ...
... ... because of the freedom ...
... ... ...
Reverse
... ... ...
... regular offerings, the oil presser of the regular offerings, ...
... the fullers, those who do the work of the temple ...
... he released them from feudal obligations and corvée-labour of every kind and ...
... he released them. The runaway, the fugitive ...
who ... whether from the land of Aramu or from the city of ...
... fled, a provinical governor, a chief administrator (of a temple), a governor, a royal official ...
... an official, a provincial governor, a chief administrator (of a temple), a governor, a royal official, and a ...
... the citizens ... is not to enter ...
... ... is not to anoint, not to release, to another place ...
... he entrusted to the citizens of Borsippa; ... tax of the citizens ...
... ... ...
... ... ...
... ... ...
... a mayor, a herald ...
... he entrusted to him; his property ...
... a provincial governor, a chief administrator (of a temple), a governor, a royal official ...
... he imposes ... for Borsippa. In one kurru, one sūtu of field ...
... my lord wrote ... ...
... he purified. If a provincial governor, a chief administrator (of a temple), a governor, a royal official ...
... Borsippa ... unknowingly a sin to him against ...
... ... and of my house, my lord ... ...
... the citizens of Borsippa whom Marduk-zākir-šumi, the king of Babylon, at the command of the god Nabû, his lord ...
... he purified ... ... of the god Nabû for the god Nabû, his lord, (and) in Borsippa, the city ... ...
Anyone who ... removes this ... and ... the foundation of the people of Borsippa ...
... whether prince, or viceroy, or overseer, or lieutenant ...
... the servants of the god Nabû, my lord, ... ...
... ... ...
... ... ...
... ... ...
(Property) of Abdi-il, šaknu-official of Adinu, the Dakkurian.
One-third mina, correct (weight). (2 - 4) Palace of Nabû-šumu-līšir, the Dakkurian, the ... of the god Marduk.
(Property) of Marduk-šākin-šumi, son of Marduk-zēra-uballiṭ, descendant of Iakīnu. Gift presented by Uṣur-Marduk.
Thirty minas, correct (weight). (2 - 3) Palace of Erība-Marduk, king of Babylon.
x mina(s), correct (weight). (2 - 3) Palace of Erība-Marduk, king of Babylon.
... Marduk-apla-uṣur ... the Chaldean.
... Tigris River ... ...
... ... ... he killed;
... ... ... ...
... ... ... ... people
... ... ... the fifth day ... ...
... ... ... to Esagila.
... ...
... ...
At that time Nabû-šuma-iškun directed his attention from Babylon to his (own) land.
At the command of the gods Nabû and Marduk, < his> lords, he entered ... into his house;
He did not go out again either to do battle or to go on a journey ...
Further, in the third year he brought (the statue of) the goddess Nanāia of Ezida, the beloved of the god Nabû, into the temple’s sacred workshop.
He held back (the statue of) the god Nabû in Babylon and turned the eve of the (eššēšu)-festival and the eššēšu-festival day (itself) into (a festival of only) one day.
With the good garment of the god Bēl (Marduk) in the month of Šabaṭu, the good garment of the god Nabû ...
... of the god Bēl he extended to the goddess Tašmētu.
Hair ... he made abundant ... gold ... he entered the sanctuary of the god Bēl, introducing ...
He introduced the leek, which is taboo to Ezida ... the god Nabû, and made those privileged to enter the temple eat (it).
The god Ea, the lord of wisdom, whose exalted dwelling ...
He made (him) get up from (his) dwelling, (a place) befitting his great divinity, making (him) sit in the gate ...
The god Madānu ... Babylon ... he removes his ... and makes (him) go (away).
... and ...
... ... ... ... ...
... ... ... ... ...
... she who sits on the throne ... seven lions.
... ... and ... he trampled.
... ... ... and ... he harnessed it.
That which the goddess Ištar ... the goddess Ištar ... ... he had released.
... ... he extended.
... the god Ninpirig ... he brought near.
... the god Nabû was detained in Babylon and ... and dwelt among the rebels.
... Babylon ... ... he burned with fire.
... him, the great lord, the god Marduk, ... the god Marduk ... the king went.
... ... he said ... and sets.
... ... ... ...
... ... ... ...
... ...
... ... ... ... ...
When the splendid lord ... the exemption of Bab<ylon>, Borsippa and ...
And the oath which Enlil-AŠ-KUR, son of Ku-... the governor of the city Larak, had caused them (the people) < to take>,
In Babylon, Borsippa, and Kutha, he extended in the presence of the gods Bēl, Nabû, and Nergal.
Yearly he increased against them (the level of) killing, robbing, murdering, (and) performance of feudal obligations and corvée-labour.
On a < single> day he burned (alive) sixteen Cuthians with fire in the gate of the god Zababa, which is inside Babylon.
He carried off citizens of Babylon to the lands of Ḫatti and Elam as greeting-gifts.
He expelled the citizens of Babylon, their wives, children and servants, and he < settled them> in the steppe.
The house(s) of the citizens of Babylon ... he piled up into heaps of ruins and turned (them) over to his palace.
(With regard to) the public square, the route of the god Šarʾur, beloved of his lord, who goes along the street(s) of his city in the third month,
He blocked off the roadway of his (Šarʾur’s) route and turned (it) over to his palace; he had him (Šarʾur) go along a road which was not part of his route.
He seized Mudammiq-Adad, the son of Adad-šuma-ēreš, his ally, without (Mudammiq-Adad having committed) any transgression or rebellion;
He carried off his (Mudammiq-Adad’s) people, as many as there were, to the Chaldeans and Arameans as greeting-gifts.
He put at his own disposal his (Mudammiq-Adad’s) villages, fields, houses, orchards, and possessions, as many as there were.
(With regard to) Śagab-il of the city Dūru, who in order to save (himself) had come out from the bank of the Euphrates (and gone) before him (Nabû-šuma-iškun) with a treaty and oath,
He (Nabû-šuma-iškun) committed against him that which is taboo to princes, (namely) insults (and) unspeakable abuse, and he counted his city as booty.
In the sixth year, he directed his attention to renovating Esagila, the palace of the Enlil of the gods (Marduk).
The property of Esagila, as much as previous kings had brought into it,
He brought out and collected inside his (own) palace; he appropriated (it) for himself:
(Namely) silver, gold, precious, valuable stones and everything befitting a divinity, as much as there was.
In accordance with his (own) desire, he installed there the gods of the Sealand, the Chaldeans, and Arameans.
He adorned his palace women (and) presented (them) as greeting-gifts to the lands of Ḫatti and Elam.
When the seventh year arrived, he went to Bīt-Dakkūri with evil intent;
Afterwards, Nabû-šuma-iškun, the Dakkurian, < in accordance with> the treaty and the oath (sworn by the names) of the great gods,
Brought out horses, soldiers, and chariots and ordered (them) on a campaign with him.
He gave bread, fine beer, and ḫirigalû-flour to his entire camp.
On the twentieth day of the month of Addaru, the day ... to the gods Šamaš and Marduk, he did not respect (his sworn) treaty and oath;
The people, as many as were encamped in green pastures, held joyful celebrations.
... ... ...
... the god Bēl ... he settled.
... the god Sîn ...
... in the shrine ...
... ... ... ...
... Babylon ... he established them.
... ... ... Babylon
... ... ... that he had gathered
... ... ... let me send.
... the great lord, the god Marduk ... ... glared;
... ... they removed him and ... he plundered ... of his house.
... ... his/its survivor(s) ... he was confined;
... the fugitive ... he turned back;
... the land of Akkad ... he burned.
... ... Borsippa ... ... Dilbat and Cutha.
... against him for a leader ... their ... he plunders their possessions.
... ... he went and ... ... the governor of Larak.
... the treaty and oath (sworn by the names of) the great gods, seven times ... ... and they seized with him.
... these men ... without (any) transgression ... ... he seized;
... ... he took them and ... settled them in the steppe.
... ... to the bitter water ... them.
... he reached and the god Nabû, who before ... he held back in Babylon.
... ... ... ... he had made;
... and the god Nabû, the august heir ... he plundered it, they said.
... ... ...
... ...
... ...
For the god ... ... venerable, splendid, the god Mudugas, exalted, sovereign, spouse of the goddess Ninsiga — (most) honoured of (all) goddesses, mistress of (all) the inhabited world, majestic, goddess of absolutely everything — the god Utulu, the powerful lord who marches in front of all the gods, perfect ... of the gods, resplendent, beloved of the god Ninšiku (Ea), (i 5) endowed with wisdom and insight, who evaluates omens, ... of kingship, the one who directs everything, who grants sceptre, throne, reign, (and) royal crown, perfect offspring of the god Nunamnir, honoured son, offspring of the princess of the gods, the goddess Erua, ... of Esagila, lord of everything, victorious, beloved of the god Marduk, ... of the god Asari, eldest son, foremost, the one who goes in front, the one who ... with the father who begat him ... (i 10) ... judge of the gods, king of the great gods, the one who is resplendent in the east and in the west, ... of the gods, his own counsellor, the one who accepts entreaties (and) hearkens to supplications, one who has broad understanding, ..., the one to whose venerable command the Igīgū gods submit themselves humbly (and) the Anunnakū gods ... clad in a holy awe-inspiring sheen, garbed in terrifying splendour, filled with fearfulness, ... established judgment and the Sibitti gods do not ... (i 15) ..., the one who has work songs sung in the land, the one who begot ... ... ... who establishes plenty, abundance, and wealth for ...... the great gods ... who makes prosper ... is not equalled ... ... ...
... ... to administer the people correctly ... to Borsippa ... he proceeds along the road ... (i 5') this storehouse ... a praiseworthy structure ... ... of this storehouse in ... which had buckled and become weak ... ... ... which from time immemorial, from long before me, no governor (or) commissioner of Borsippa (i 10') had done, he charged me with this work and entrusted (it) to me — me, Nabû-šuma-imbi, son of Ēda-ēṭir, nešakku-official, one privileged to enter the temple of the god Nabû, governor of Borsippa, slave who reveres his great godhead (and) stands in service before him, prayerful soldier who constantly pays attention to the cult of the god Nabû, lord of the lands (and) lord of the gods. I began that work and ordered that it be done.
Disorders, disturbances, revolt, and turmoil occurred in Borsippa, the city of truth and justice. During the reign of king Nabû-šuma-iškun, the Dakkurian, the Babylonians, the Borsippians, (the people of) the town Dutēti (which is on) the bank of the Euphrates, all the Chaldeans, Arameans, (and) the people of Dilbat sharpened their weapons for many days (to fight) with one another (and) slew one another. Moreover, they fought with the Borsippians over their fields.
... ... Nabû-šuma-iddin, son of Aqar-Nabû, one privileged to enter the temple of the god Nabû, the chief administrator of Ezida ...... by himself he set against/concerning Nabû-šuma-imbi, son of Ēda-ēṭir, governor of Borsippa. (ii i) By night, like thieves, the enemy, the foreigner, fugitives, ..., wicked enemies, with stopped ears, who would not listen to me, perverse, (...) I returned ... to Ezida, and Ezida and Borsippa ... they seized and set up a hue and cry over the city and temple, (ii 5) as they fought. On this night, the Borsippians and the people of ..., who were present to help one another, surrounded the house of Nabû-šuma-imbi, son of Ēda-ēṭir, governor of Borsippa and with arrows and ... From evening until sunrise they raised battle-crys. From evening until sunrise Nabû-šuma-imbi, son of Ēda-ēṭir, governor of Borsippa ...... prayed, “Nabû, my ... are no more!” ... ... ...
... their ... ... ... burnt ... plenty, and to ... (ii 5') ... ... the storehouse ... Nabû-šuma-imbi, son of Ēda-ēṭir, governor of Borsippa ... who reveres him (and) stands in service before him ... his great godhead, let them speak ... let him agree! Let him bestow on him as a gift and grant him as a present peace (and) good ...!
May the goddess Nanāia, ... mistress of (all) the goddesses ..., the compassionate goddess, creator of ..., whose word is favourable, whose utterance cannot be changed, whose command cannot be altered ..., intercede for me daily (ii 15') in the presence of the god Nabû ... who makes decisions for heaven and netherworld ..., the son of the Enlil of the gods (Marduk)! May I increase (my) good fortune! ... distant days, years ..., life of shining ... as a gift ... offspring, may ... progeny ... in the palace ... may her word be favourable! ...
May his position as shepherd be confirmed with (regard to) Ezida and Borsippa! ... May his words be pleasing unto the king of the gods, the lord of lords! ... way ... Ezida and Borsippa in the presence of the god Nabû and the goddess Nanāia, the supreme gods ... May he experience the fullness of old age! In strife, war, fierce battle, and campaigning, ... (ii 25') he, his offspring, his ... to go to his aid, to overthrow ... may he fill his hands with plenty ... (and) great abundance! At ... and at ... of the god Erra, the raging one, beloved son of the god Enlil, the powerful ... May dagger (and) plague never draw near him! May peace be established for him! ... to extinguish his wicked enemies like embers! May he praise your (Nabû and Nanāia’s) godhead and your greatness (ii 30') for (all) future generations! May you, lord, be his help ... Call him so that he may sing of your fame for future days! O god Nabû accept the prayers and supplications of Nabû-šuma-imbi, governor of Borsippa!
Inscription dealing with the storehouse, from the enclosure wall of Ezida.
For the goddess Uṣur-amāssu, august lady, who renders judgment for the land, who makes decision(s) for heaven and netherworld, daughter of the god Adad, beloved of the god Marduk, the one whose command cannot be revoked:
With regard to the Akītu (temple), which long ago had become old, whose name had been forgotten, and which (now) stood in ruins, its walls had buckled and their foundations collapsed. Its ground-plan had been forgotten and its (the ground-plan’s) shape had changed. No king (or) commissioner (or) prince or city ruler had turned his attention to do this work and to renovate the Akītu (temple).
Finally, Bēl-ibni and Nabû-zēra-ušabši, sons of Bulluṭu of Uruk, turned their attention to do this work and to renovate the Akītu (temple). Hoe and basket were taken up by them wholeheartedly and they had an abode of pure riches built for the goddess.
On account of this, when the goddess Uṣur-amāssu, the august lady, enters with pleasure into her Akītu (temple) and when she sits on high in the abode of her great divinity, may she duly turn her shining countenance upon Bēl-ibni and Nabû-zēra-ušabši and may she lengthen their days!
They had the Akītu (temple) built anew in order to prolong their days, to ensure their good health (and) the well-being of their offspring, (and) to ensure they not become ill. 19) Fifth year of Nabû-nāṣir, king of Babylon. 20) In the presence of Nabû-mukīn-zēri, son of Nabû-apkal-ilī, viceroy of ...
For the goddess Ištar, mistress of the lands, supreme (among) the gods, valiant, the goddess Nineanna (‟Lady of Eanna”), who dwells in Uruk, who has gathered to herself all the divine offices:
(With regard to) Eanna, which Šulgi, a previous king, had had built and which had become old, and (with regard to) the shrine of the god Ningizzida, which Anam, an earlier king, had had constructed inside it, (5) (with regard to) this temple, whose walls had buckled and whose bondings had disintegrated, whose parapet had collapsed and which had become unrecognizable, (and) whose reconstruction had not occurred to the kings, (his) predecessors,
At that time, the great lord, the god Marduk, had turned away in divine wrath from the land of Akkad, and the evil enemy, the Subarian, exercised the rule over the land of Akkad for seven years, (10) until the days had elapsed, the appointed time had arrived, (and) the great lord, the god Marduk, became reconciled with the land of Akkad, with which he had become angry.
He (the god Marduk) looked (with favour) upon Marduk-apla-iddina (II), king of Babylon, prince who reveres him, to whom he (the god Marduk) stretched out his hand, legitimate eldest son of Erība-Marduk, king of Babylon, who has made firm the foundation(s) of the land. The king of the gods, the god Asari, duly named him to the shepherdship of the land of Sumer and Akkad (and) personally said: “This is indeed the shepherd who will gather the scattered (people).”
With the power of the great lord, the god Marduk, and of the hero of the gods, the god Utulu, he defeated the widespread army of Subartu and shattered their weapons. He brought about their overthrow and prevented them from treading on the territory of the land of Akkad.
With the excellent understanding which the god Ea, the creator, maker of all things, had bestowed upon him, (20) (and with) the extensive knowledge which the god Ninšiku had granted him, he directed his attention to performing the rites, to administering correctly the rituals, and to renovating the cult centres and the sanctuaries of the divine residences of the great gods of the land of Akkad.
He was assiduous toward the sanctuaries of Eanna, the abode of the goddess Ištar, mistress of the lands, his lady. (With regard to) the outer enclosure wall of Eanna in the lower courtyard (25) and (with regard to) the temple of the god Ningizzida, which had been constructed inside it to one side, he tore down its parapet and laid bare its foundation.
With fervent entreaties, prayers, and expression(s) of humility, he laid its foundations (anew) and made (them) as firm as a mountain. He raised its top with (ritually) pure bricks and made (it) as bright as daylight. He made (it) larger than before and fashioned (its) structure artfully.
On account of this, when the goddess Ištar, mistress of the lands, looks upon this work with pleasure, may she bestow a (long) life on Marduk-apla-iddina (II), king of Babylon! May she increase his years and may he experience the fullness of old age! By her august command, which cannot be changed, may he subjugate at his feet all of his enemies and may the kings, his enemies, drag their weighty tribute — the abundance of the four quarters (of the world), the yield of mountain and sea — into Šuanna (Babylon)! (35) May he receive their present and may he bring (them) into Esagila, before the lord of lords! May his reign be established in Babylon for all time!
I saw the royal inscription of a king who had preceded me (and) who had built that temple. I did not alter his royal inscription, but (rather) I placed (it) with my own royal inscription. Anyone in the future — whether king, or son of a king, or commissioner, or governor, or chief administrator (of a temple), or mayor — who, appointed by the great lord, the god Marduk, decides to (re)build Eanna, let him see this royal inscription and let him place (it) with his own royal inscription for the future!
For the lady, goddess Inanna, mistress of the lands, his lady: Marduk-apla-iddina (II), (5) king of Babylon, descendant of Erība-Marduk, king of Sumer (and) Akkad, (re)constructed Eanna, her beloved temple.
1–12) For the lady, goddess Inanna, mistress of the lands, his lady: Marduk-apla-iddina (II), (5) king of Babylon, king of Sumer (and) Akkad, king with clean hands, in (his) second kingship (re)constructed Eanna, (10) her beloved temple, for the sake of his life.
To his lord, Marduk-apla-iddina (II), son of Iakīn, presented (this object).
For the goddess Ninlil, great lady, august lady, compassionate mother, who dwells in Ekurnizu (‟House, Fearsome Mountain”), which is inside Hursagkalama (...), his lady:
Marduk-apla-iddina (II), < king> of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, had baked bricks made (for) the bridge over the Nār-Bānītu canal, which from .... He had (the bridge) built in order to ensure his good health and his life, and he presented (it to her).
On account of this, when the goddess Ninlil (...) looks at this temple with pleasure, ... of/which Iddin-Nergal, governor of Kish, the servant who reveres you, in Kish ... to live in safety, to have a long life (and) years of plenty and abundance, for the king, his lord, to that man ... may she give him as a present! For kingship ...!
... ... ... he turned upside down ... He changed their abode. At that time, the god Marduk, the great lord, angrily ordered his defeat. (5') The gods of his city/country became angry and ... him. ... they gave a magnificent commission ... He tore down the sanctuaries of their (the Babylonians’) gods, plundered them, and removed (the statues of) their gods. The god Ninurta, foremost son (of the god Enlil), revealed to him (in a vision) an omen concerning the goddess Ba-KUR, lady of omens, and caused (him) to remember (this) in his heart. (10') They saw the goddess Ba-KUR during the sacking of the town Šapīia; he became afraid (and) concerned. He (re)established their offerings (and) released to the god Nabû, his lord, the plundered gods of Ša-uṣur-Adad. He abolished their performance of feudal obligations and corvée-labour and established their freedom from taxation.
At that time Nabû-gamil, son of Tarībi, one privileged to enter the temple of the god Ninurta and the goddess Ba-KUR, grasped the hand of the goddess Ba-KUR and caused (her) to take (the road) to Ša-uṣur-Adad, the holy city. She entered the shrine Etenten (‟House which Soothes”), her abode. The king Bēl-ibni wrote an official document (granting) exemption to Ša-uṣur-Adad and gave it to Nabû-gamil. Moreover, he made Ša-uṣur-Adad free of all claims for the god Nabû, his lord.
With regard to anyone in the future –– whether a king, or a son of a king, or a prince, or a governor, or a judge, or anyone else who is appointed by the god Marduk, the great lord, and (who) exercises lordship over the land –– (who) does anything deceitful against Ša-uṣur-Adad (25') and the gods who dwell there –– whether they summon the people to (perform their) feudal obligations and tillūtu-service, or you alter (the status of) their fields and reckon them under (your own) jurisdiction –– may the god Marduk, the great lord whose command takes precedence, turn his favourable destiny to evil and (30') decree in writing ...! May he promptly give his throne to his enemy and destroy his people by hunger (and) famine! May the god Nabû, the scribe of Esagila, who directs (all) regions (of the world) and provides abundantly for the sanctuaries, cut short his future and decree in writing that his life (last) < not> one day (more)!
Šamaš-šuma-ukīn, mighty king, king of the Amnānu, king of Babylon, capable (and) judicious, shepherd, favourite of the gods Enlil, Šamaš, and Marduk, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, I ––
In the womb of (my) mother who bore me (lit. ‟in the place of creating of the mother who bore me”), the queen of the gods, the goddess Erua, gladly appointed me to be lord of the people.
The great gods looked with pleasure upon me to gather the scattered people of Akkad and they joyfully appointed me to carry out the forgotten rites and rituals.
The king of the gods, the god Asari, came happily with me from Baltil (Aššur) unto ‟the Seat of Life.”
The great lord (and) hero, the god Marduk, gladly took up his holy residence in Esagila, the palace of heaven and netherworld.
I restored the precious rites (and) choice cult practices of the great gods who sit upon dais(es) in the whole of Ekur.
At that time, I (re-)erected the dilapidated parts of Badullisâ (‟Wall Named in Ancient Times”), the (city) wall of Sippar, which had become weak and buckled because of enemy disturbances. I strengthened its weak sections (and) with earth raised its top (as high) as a mountain.
On account of this, O god Šamaš, the manly hero, and goddess Aya, (his) bride, look upon my good deeds with pleasure and speak well of me –– Šamaš-šuma-ukīn, the humble one who reveres you!
For the god Šamaš, king of Sippar, his lord: Šamaš-šuma-ukīn, (5) viceroy of Šuanna (Babylon), king of Sumer (and) Akkad, (re)constructed Ebabbar (“Shining House”) anew with baked bricks for the sake of his life and for the sake of the life of Ashurbanipal, (10) king of Assyria, his favourite brother.
I, Šamaš-šuma-ukīn, mighty king, king of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, august vice-regent, true shepherd, who reveres the lord of lords; (5) the one during whose reign the Enlil of the gods, the god Marduk, had pity, entered Babylon amidst rejoicing, and took up his residence in Esagila forevermore; who (re)confirmed the regular offerings (in) Esagila (for) the gods of the land of Sumer and Akkad; son of Esarhaddon, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, (and) king of the land of Sumer and Akkad; grandson of Sennacherib, king of Assyria; descendant of Sargon (II), king of Assyria (and) (10) king of the land of Sumer and Akkad; favourite (brother) of Ashurbanipal, king of the world, king of Assyria, (and) king of the four quarters (of the world) —
(With regard to) the enclosure wall of Ezida (‟True House”) which had become old during the reign of a previous king and whose foundation had become weak, during my reign, I renovated its dilapidated sections and made (them) high as a mountain.
Whoever among the future kings, my descendants, appears and governs the land, may he read my statue, anoint (it) with oil, (and) (20) offer a sacrifice! May he write my name with his (own) name and praise my deeds! (Then), may the god Nabû, scribe of Esagila, inscribe a long life for him upon (his) tablet, determine (for him) longevity as his lot, (and) (25) constantly say good things about him in the presence of the god Marduk, king of the gods!
(But), as for the one who erases my inscribed name or the name of my favourite brother by some crafty device and makes my statue unrecognizable, or changes its position and (30) does not put it with his (own) statue, may the god Nabû, august lord, glare at him angrily and make his name, his descendants, his offspring, (and) his progeny disappear from the mouths of the multitudes of people, and may he have no pity upon him!
For the god Nabû, powerful, eminent, wisest of the gods, exalted, noble, scribe of everything, supervisor of the totality of heaven and netherworld, who makes opposing forces agree, who knows everything, splendid, perfect, who has gathered to himself all the (divine) offices, who controls the omens, lord of skilful works, whose command is pre-eminent in the assembly of the gods, his fathers, (5) (one with) a far-reaching mind, whose heart none among the gods knows, supreme lord, who raises up lords (and) the fame of rulers, who gives sceptre, throne, and reign, who confirms kingship, compassionate one, who bestows for future days power and victory; most important son of the god Asari (Marduk), offspring of the goddess Erua — queen (and) goddess of ladies — who dwells in Ezida — the true house, (located) in Borsippa, the cult centre which is worthy of honour — great lord, my lord:
I, Šamaš-šuma-ukīn, mighty king, king of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, wise viceroy, valiant prince, ..., who reveres the lord of lords, wise vice-regent, true shepherd, who is assiduous toward the sanctuaries of the great gods, who (re)settled Babylon, (re)built Esagila, (and) provides for Ezida; (15) the one during whose reign the Enlil of the gods, the god Marduk, relented, entered Babylon amidst rejoicing, and took up his residence in Esagila forevermore; the one who (re)confirmed the regular offerings (in) Esagila (for) the gods of the land of Sumer and Akkad; son of Esarhaddon, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, viceroy of Babylon, (and) king of the land of Sumer and Akkad; (20) favourite (brother) of Ashurbanipal, great king, mighty king, king of the world, (and) king of Assyria; grandson of Sennacherib, great king, mighty king, king of the world, (and) king of Assyria; descendant of Sargon (II), great king, mighty king, king of the world, (and) king of Assyria; descendant of the enduring royal lineage of Bēl-bāni, son of Adasi, scion of Baltil (Aššur) —
In order to ensure the good health of Ashurbanipal, king of Assyria, my favourite brother, to prolong (his) life, to ensure the well-being of (his) descendant(s), to confirm (his) reign, and to defeat (his) enemy, and, with regard to me, to ensure my good health, to prolong my life, to ensure the well-being of my descendant(s), to confirm my reign, (and) to ensure that I might have no illness, ... together, I had the storehouses of Ezida built anew and made (them) high as a mountain.
May any future prince, during whose reign this work falls into disrepair (and) sustains damage, repair its dilapidated state! May he write my name with his (own) name, look at my royal inscription, anoint (it) with oil, offer a sacrifice, (and) place (my royal inscription) with his (own) royal inscription! The god Nabû will (then) listen to his prayers.
(But) as for the one who erases my inscribed name or the name of my favourite brother by some crafty device, (or) destroys my royal inscription, or changes its position and does not place (it) with his (own) royal inscription, may the god Nabû, august lord, glare at him angrily and make his name (and) his descendant(s) disappear from the lands!
For the star of the god Marduk, mighty ... exalted, bright, the god Šiḫṭu, lord of catchwater, spring ... (and) wide seas, who produces (both) rain and flood, the god Imdudu, who roams through heaven and netherworld, lord of the wind blast ... and storm, who establishes the inundation, (10) the god Nabû, the bright one who holds the lead-rope of earth and netherworld, star of East and West ..., at whose appearance the Igīgū gods and the Anunnakū gods happily ... who dwells in Ezida, which is inside Borsippa, (...) his lord:
Šamaš-šuma-ukīn, viceroy of Babylon ... had (this) ... made and a boat ... it was brought with difficulty ... procession ... for the conveyance of his great lordship, (for his) going and returning ..., the god Šiddukišarra, who administers all of heaven and netherworld ... for his descent where water, the life of the land, the well-being of the house ...... (20) ... august, splendid, son of the god Asari (Marduk), who has broad understanding ..., the god Mudugasâ, supreme, ruler ... lord of ingenious things, martial, who in counsel ... expert of all the temples ...... the one who makes opposing forces agree, who administers everything ..., (25) who has broad understanding, scribe of Esagila, who watches over the Igīgū gods and the Anunnakū gods, who bears the tablet of the fates of the great gods, who supervises everything, capable, wise, god whose rule is pre-eminent, lord of Borsippa, who dwells in Ezida, the great lord his lord, Šamaš-šuma-ukīn, viceroy of Babylon, (30) king of the land of Sumer and Akkad had (this object) of 18 1/2 cubits made ....
In order to ensure his good health, to prolong his days ... may he determine as his fate!
... ... ... ... ... ... Ashurbanipal ... Šamaš-šuma-ukīn, king ...
the one during whose reign, the Enlil of the gods, the god Marduk, relented, entered Babylon amidst rejoicing and took up his residence in Esagila forevermore; the one who (re)confirmed the regular offerings for Esagila and the gods of the land of Sumer and Akkad; (5') son of Esarhaddon, great king, mighty king, king of the world, king of Assyria, viceroy of Babylon, (and) king of the land of Sumer and Akkad; grandson of Sennacherib, great king, mighty king, king of the world, (and) king of Assyria; descendant of Sargon (II), great king, mighty king, king of the world, (and) king of Assyria
For the goddess Ištar, supreme lady: Sîn-šarra-uṣur, viceroy of Ur, in order to ensure the good health of Šamaš-šuma-ukīn, king of Babylon, gave to the goddesses Ištar and Nanāia (a plot of land measuring) 660 (cubits along its) upper width, bordering (the property of) Atrāia (and) stretching to the estate of the simmagir-official; (5) its upper and lower lengths stretch from the Euphrates (River) to the town Sūrānu.
Whoever you are, whether king or overseer, who appears and changes the border or boundary line, may the god Marduk, the great lord, highest-ranking god (and) lord of the lands, afflict him with dropsy (as) his punishment which cannot be alleviated! May the goddess Ištar of Uruk, the august lady, inflict defeat and rout on his army! (15) May she ungird him (lit. “loosen his loins”) in the presence of his enemy! May the goddess Nanāia, beloved of the gods Nabû and Marduk, continually speak evil of him in the presence of the god Nabû, the one who loves him (Sîn-šarra-uṣur)! May the god Nergal, the mightiest of the gods, most overpowering of the gods (and) valiant male, not spare his life in plague or bloody battle! May he take away his descendant(s) (and) his name, and decree that his life (last) not one day (more)!
For the god Nabû, the august lord, his lord: Nabû-mukīn-apli, son of Nūr-Sîn, the seal-cutter of the god Marduk, governor of Babylon, had (this mace head) made and presented (it to him) forever in Babylon in order to ensure his good health, to prolong his days, to ensure the well-being of his offspring, to ensure his happiness, (and) to confirm his position.
(Property) of Nabû-šumu-līšir, son of Šumu-libši, provincial governor of Babylon (and) chief administrator of Esagila.
(Property) of Šamaš-mukīn-aḫi, son of Šamaš-nāṣir, the ša rēši of the king.
(Property) of Bēl-..., the ša rēši of the king.
For the god Marduk, great lord, compassionate god who dwells in Esagila, lord of Babylon, his lord:
Sargon (II), mighty king, king of Assyria, king of the world, viceroy of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, the one who provides for Esagila and Ezida, thought of (re)building the (city) wall Imgur-Enlil.
He had bricks made and constructed a quay-wall of baked bricks fired in a (ritually) pure kiln, (laid) in (both) refined and crude bitumen, along the bank of the Euphrates River, (15) in deep water. He founded the (city) wall Imgur-Enlil and the (city) wall Nēmet-Enlil (as secure) upon it as a mountain range.
May the god Marduk, great lord, look upon this work (with pleasure) and may he bestow a (long) life on Sargon, the prince who provides for him! May his reign be as firm as the foundation of Babylon!
For the god Marduk, the great lord, his lord: Sargon (II), king of the land of Assyria, king of the world, viceroy of Babylon, (10) king of Sumer (and) Akkad, constructed anew the (city) wall Imgur-Enlil (and) the (city) wall Nēmet-Enlil for the sake of his life (and) made (them) shine like daylight.
For the goddess Ištar, mistress of the lands, (most) eminent of the gods, (most) valiant of the goddesses, ... fierce, terrifying flood, (...) who is endowed with ... (i 5) ... ... majestic, ... awe, ... ... the firmament (of the heavens), ... ... ... humble, (i 10) ... who gives judgment and decision, ... purification rites, ... which is inside Uruk, the great lady, his lady:
Sargon (II), king of Assyria, king of the world, viceroy of Babylon, king of (the land of) Sumer and Akkad, prince who provides for her,
In order to ensure his good health, to prolong his days, to lengthen his reign, to ... his ..., (and) to overthrow his enemy,
(With regard to) Eanna, which Íulgi, a previous king, had had built and which had become old, (i 20) (with regard to) this temple, whose walls had buckled, whose bondings had disintegrated, whose parapet had become ruined, whose foundation had collapsed, (and) whose reconstruction had not occurred to (any of) the kings, (his) predecessors —
At that time, the great lord, the god Marduk, gave excellent judgment to Sargon (II), king of Assyria, king of the world, viceroy of Babylon, one who was chosen by the god Asari, and increased his understanding.
He (Sargon) directed his attention to renovating the abandoned cult centers and sanctuaries of all the gods of the land Akkad. He was assiduous toward the sanctuaries of Eanna, the abode of the goddess Ištar, mistress of the lands, his lady. (With regard to) the outer enclosure wall of Eanna in the lower courtyard, he tore down its parapet and laid bare its foundation.
With fervent entreaties, prayers, and expressions of humility he (Sargon) laid its foundations (anew) and he fixed its foundation on the breast of the netherworld (as secure) as a mountain. (ii 1) With the work of the god Kulla, the chief builder, and (with the help of) artisans who know (their) craft, he raised its top with (ritually) pure bricks and completed its construction. He made (it) superior to what had been there before and carried out the plans correctly.
On account of this, may the goddess Ištar, mistress of the lands, look upon this work with pleasure and may she bestow a (long) life on Sargon, king of Assyria, (ii 10) king of the world, viceroy of Babylon, the king who provides for her! May she say good things about him before the god Marduk, king of the gods! May she go (with him) as his helper in strife and battle!
May he smash the weapons of his enemies and may he achieve whatever he wants! May he subjugate at his feet all rulers who are not submissive to him! (ii 20) By the command of the goddess Ištar, beloved of the lord of the gods, may he increase (his) good fortune! May long life, happiness, and gladness be bestowed on him and may his reign be long! May he make the foundation of his throne secure for future days and may he control (all) regions (of the world)!
May he exercise the rule over the people who are of privileged status (and) freed from taxation by the great gods! (ii 30) During his reign may those ones freed from taxation not be in disorder! May he decrease their negligence and may he remove their sin! Let turmoil be unknown to them (ii 35) (and) may he make their heart(s) rejoice! Like the foundations of Uruk and Eanna, may their foundations be firm!
Copy of the inscription, dispatch to/of the palace of Assyria; copied and collated.
Sargon (II), great king, king of the world, king of Babylon, (5) king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, commander of Assyria and of all Amurru, had the outer enclosure wall, the courtyard of Eanna, (10) the narrow gate, and the regular gate built.
For the goddess Inanna, lady of Uruk, who dwells in Eanna, the august, supreme lady, (5) his lady: Sargon (II), king of the world, viceroy of Babylon, king of Sumer (and) Akkad, (10) shepherd of the land of Assyria, had baked bricks made (and) made the processional way of Eanna shine like daylight.
For the lady, the goddess Inanna, mistress of the lands, his lady: Sargon (II), (5) mighty king, king of Babylon, king of the world, king ..., king ..., (re)constructed (10) Eanna, her beloved temple.
Nabopolassar, king of Babylon, protégé of the gods Nabû and Marduk, I:
(As for) Imgur-Enlil, the great wall of Babylon, which had become weak (and) had collapsed before my time, I firmly set its foundations on (its) original socle. I built (it) anew using people mustered from my land and (15) I surrounded Babylon on (all) four sides. I raised its superstructure just like the one in earlier times.
O wall, speak favorable things (about me) to the god Marduk.
Nabopolassar, king of Babylon, protégé of the gods Nabû and Marduk, I:
(As for) Imgur-Enlil, the great wall of Babylon, (10) I sought out its original foundation from the bank of the Araḫtu canal on the north side, upstream, at the gate of the goddess Ištar, to the south, downstream, at the gate of the gate of the god Uraš, and I built (it) in the same way for the god Marduk, my lord.
O wall, speak favorable things (about me) to the god Marduk.
Nabopolassar, king of justice, shepherd chosen by the god Marduk, creation of the goddess Ninmenna — the exalted princess, the queen of queens — protégé of the god Nabû and the goddess Tašmētu, beloved prince of the god Ninšiku:
When, during my childhood, (although) I was a son of a nobody, I was constantly assiduous towards the shrines of the gods Nabû and Marduk, my lords; (my) mind pondered about making their rites secure and properly administering their kidudû-rites; my attention was set on truth and justice.
The god Šazu, the lord who knows the hearts of the gods of heaven and netherworld, the one who constantly observes the ingenious behavior of the people, for me — the child who could not be found among the people — he observed my intention(s) and (i 20) made me pre-eminent in the land where I was created. He called (my) name for dominion over the land and people, made a good lamassu walk beside me, (and) allowed (me) to successfully undertake everything that I did. He made the god Nergal, the almighty one of the god, march at my side; he killed my enemy (and) cut down my opponent.
(As for) the Assyrians, who had ruled over the land of Akkad because of the hatred of the gods and had made the people of the land suffer under its heavy yoke, I, the weak (and) powerless one who is assiduous towards the lord of lords (Marduk), (ii 1) with the powerful strength of the gods Nabû and Marduk — my lords — I barred them (lit: “their feet”) from the land of Akkad and had (the Babylonians) cast off their yoke.
At that time, Nabopolassar, king of Babylon, the one who pleases the heart(s) of the gods Nabû and Marduk, I: (As for) Imgur-Enlil — the great wall of Babylon, the original boundary marker which has been manifest since the distant past, the firmly-founded ground plan that has endured for all eternity, the high mountain that rivals the heavens, the strong shield that bolts the entrance to the land of enemies, the wide courtyard of the Igīgū gods, the broad forecourt of the Anunnakū gods, (ii 15) the stairway to the heavens, the ladder to the netherworld, the station(s) of the gods Lugal-girra and Meslamtaʾe, the cult niche of the goddess Ištar — the great queen — the site of the bow of the god Dagān — the warrior — the camp enclosure of warrior — the god Ninurta — (ii 20) the temple with the privileged status of the gods Anu and Enlil, the place of sophisticated designs of the god Ea — the lord of Eridu — the secluded ground of the great gods, whose foundation(s) the Igīgū (and) Anunnakū gods firmly established in the jubilation of their heart(s), (ii 25) (whose construction) they had skillfully executed according to plan, (and) whose superstructure they had raised — a long time ago it became weak, collapsed, and, on account of heavy rains and downpours, its wall(s) were carried away (and) its foundation(s) had become a heap of ruins and was piled up like a tell.
I mustered the workmen of the gods Enlil, Šamaš, and Marduk and (then) I made (them) carry hoe(s and) imposed (on them the carrying of) basket(s). From the bank of the Araḫtu canal on the upper side, at the gate of the goddess Ištar, (ii 35) to the bank of the Araḫtu < canal> on the lower side, at the gate of the gate of the god Uraš, I removed its heaped up earth. I examined (and) inspected its old foundation and (then) laid its brickwork on its original place. I firmly secured its foundation on the surface (lit. “breast”) of the netherworld. I surrounded the east bank with a strong lining.
Nabopolassar, the humble (and) submissive one who reveres the gods Nabû and Marduk, the shepherd who pleases the heart of the goddess Pa(p)nun-anki (Zarpanītu), the one who examines the old foundation of Babylon, (iii 5) the one who discovers brick(s) of the past, the one who executes according to plan (work) on the original socle — (which has existed) for all eternity — the one who grasps the hoe of the Igīgū gods, the one who carries the basket of the Anunnakū gods, the one who built Imgur-Enlil for the god Marduk — my lord — I:
(So that) any future king does not have my carefully selected words removed (and) that no word(s) come in existence that surpass my (own) command, I swore an oath bound by the god Marduk, my lord, and the god Šamaš, my god: “My words are not lies, but are reliable statements!”
At that time, I found a statue of a king who came before me who had built that wall, (and) I firmly placed (it) in a secure place, (in) the great foundation(s), with my (own) statue, for eternity.
Any king in the future, either a son or grandson who comes after me, whom the god Marduk names for dominion over the land: Do not set your heart on feats of might and power, (iii 25) (but rather) be assiduous towards the shrines of the gods Nabû and Marduk so that they may kill your opponent(s). The god Marduk, my lord, examines the mouth (and) observes the heart (so) whoever is true to the god Bēl (Marduk) his foundations will endure (and) whoever is true to the god Son-of-Bēl (Nabû) will live for ever.
When that wall becomes dilapidated and you repair its dilapidated section(s), exactly like when I found an inscription of a king who came before me and did not change its location, find an inscription (written) in my name (and) place (it) with your inscribed objects. By the command of the god Marduk, the great lord whose command cannot be changed, may the fame of your name be established for ever.
Nabopolassar, strong king, king of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, exalted ruler, the one who reveres the god Uraš and the goddess Ištar, true shepherd, protégé of the gods Nabû and Marduk, I:
When the great gods called (my) exalted name for dominion over the land, entrusted me with a scepter — a present to constantly guide my people — (and) made my hands grasps an exalted staff to subjugate the insubmissive, at that time, (i 15) I imposed (the carrying of) basket(s) on all of my workforce (and) made (them) carry hoe(s and) spade(s). (As for) the people of the upper and lower land(s), whose lead-rope(s) the gods Nabû and Marduk placed in my hands, the god Erra — the (...) lord ... who goes at my right side, the bail iff ..., the wise (and) great one — (ii 1) ... ... I mustered the workmen of the gods Enlil, Šamaš, and Marduk and ... on (all) four sides.
At that time, I built anew Nēmetti-Enlil (Nēmed-Enlil), its (Babylon’s) outer wall and made (it) as bright as day for the god Marduk, my lord. I strengthened the protection of Esagil and Babylon (ii 10) (and) allowed the citizens of Babylon to live (there) in peace. I made Babylon, the cult center of the great lord — the god Marduk — worthy of praise, just like it was in earlier times.
0 Marduk, the Enlil of the gods, the one who directs the (four) quarters (of the world), joyfully look upon my good deeds and, by your exalted command, give to me as a gift to my royal majesty a just scepter, a firmly-founded throne, a dynasty (lasting) until the distant future, (and) the ability to march through the four quarters (of the world), on high (mountain) peaks.
To the god Marduk, the great lord, the Enlil of the gods, the proud one, the one who directs the Igīgū gods, the one who controls the Anunnakū gods, the light of the gods — his ancestors — the one who dwells in Esagil, the lord of Babylon, my lord:
Nabopolassar, governor of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, pious prince, protégé of the gods Nabû and Marduk, the humble (and) respectful one (i 15) who thoroughly understands how to revere god and goddess in his heart, the one who provides for Esagil and Ezida, the one who is assiduous towards the rites of the great gods, I:
When, by the commands of the gods Nabû and Marduk, the beloved of my royal majesty, and (with) the strong weapon of the awesome god Erra, the one who constantly strikes my enemies with lightning, (i 25) I killed the Subarean (Assyrian) (and) turned his land into a mound of ruins (lit. “a mound and ruins”), at that time, (as for) Etemenanki — the ziggurat of Babylon, (i 30) which had become very weak (and) had been allowed to collapse before my time — the god Marduk — (my) lord — commanded me to firmly secure its foundation on the surface (lit. “breast”) of the netherworld (and) to have its summit rival the heavens.
I fashioned hoes, spades, and brickmolds (made) of elephant ivory, ebony, (and) musukkannu-wood, and (then) I made the vast number of workmen levied in my land carry (them). (ii 1) I had (them) make bricks without number (and) mold baked bricks like countless drops of rain. I had the Araḫtu canal carry off refined (and) crude bitumen like a raging flood.
With the knowledge of the god Ea, with the perspicacity of the god Marduk, with the wisdom of the god Nabû and goddess Nisaba, with the vast mind that the god who created me had allowed me to attain, (and) with my great sense of reason, I deliberated (matters) and (then) I commissioned well-trained craftsmen and (afterwards) a survey team (ii 20) measured the dimensions using a measuring rod. Master builders stretched out the (measuring) ropes (and) firmly established the ground plan. I made inquiries through divination to the gods Šamaš, Adad, and Marduk, and whenever (my) mind deliberated (matters) and took the dimensions into consideration, the great gods responded to me through the outcomes of divination.
Through the craft of the exorcist, the wisdom of the gods Ea and Marduk, I made that place pure and firmly set its foundation(s) on (its) original socle. I laid out gold, silver, (and) stones from the mountains and sea in its foundations. (ii 40) I poured out glistening ṣapšu, fine oil, aromatics, and dāmātu-paste beneath the brickwork. I fashioned statue(s) of my royal majesty carrying a basket and had (them) placed in the foundation.
I bowed (my) neck to the god Marduk, my lord, (iii 1) rolled up (my) garment, the ceremonial attire of my royal majesty, and carried mud bricks (lit. “bricks and mud”) on my head. I had baskets made from gold and silver and (iii 10) I made Nebuchadnezzar — (my) first-born child, the beloved of my heart — carry, with my workmen, mud that was mixed with wine, oil, and crushed aromatics. I made Nabû-šuma-līšir — his talīmu-brother, a child who is my (own) offspring, (his) younger brother, my favorite — take up the hoe (and) spade. (iii 20) I imposed (upon him) a gold and silver basket and gave (him) as a gift to the god Marduk, my lord.
In joy and happiness, I built the temple as a replica of Ešarra and I raised its superstructure up like a mountain. (iii 30) For the god Marduk, my lord, I made it suitable to be an object of wonder, just like it was in earlier times.
0 Marduk, (my) lord, joyfully look upon my good deeds and by your exalted command, which cannot be altered, (iii 40) may (this) construction, my handiwork, stay in good repair for ever. Like the bricks of Etemenanki, which are firmly in place for eternity, firmly secure the foundation(s) of my throne until the distant future.
0 Etemenanki, pray on behalf of the king who renovated you! When the god Marduk takes up residence inside you in joy, O temple, speak favorable things (about me) to the god Marduk, my lord.
Nabopolassar, king of justice, shepherd chosen by the god Marduk, creation of the goddess Ninmenna — the exalted princess, the queen of queens — protégé of the god Nabû and the goddess Tašmētum, beloved prince of the god Ninšiku:
When, during my childhood, (although) I was a son of a nobody, I was constantly assiduous towards the shrines of the gods Nabû and Marduk, my lords; (my) mind pondered about making their rites secure and properly administering their kidudû-rites; my attention was set on truth and justice.
The god Šazu, the lord who knows the hearts of the gods of heaven and netherworld, the one who constantly observes the ingenious behavior of the people, for me — the child who could not be found among the people — he observed my intention(s) and made me pre-eminent in the land where I was created. He called (my) name for dominion over the land and people, made a good lamassu walk beside me, (and) allowed (me) to successfully undertake everything that I did. (15) He made the god Nergal, the almighty one of the god, march at my side; he killed my enemy (and) cut down my opponent.
(As for) the Assyrians, who from distant days had ruled over all of the people and had made the people of the land suffer under its heavy yoke, I, the weak (and) powerless one who is assiduous towards the lord of lords (Marduk), with the powerful strength of the gods Nabû and Marduk — my lords — I barred them (lit: “their feet”) from the land of Akkad and had (the Babylonians) cast off their yoke.
At that time, (as for) E-PA-GÌN-tila, the temple of the god Ninurta that is inside Šuanna (Babylon), which a former king before my time had had built, but had not finished its work, I set my mind to the renovation of that temple. (25) I mustered the workmen of the gods Enlil, Šamaš, and Marduk and (then) I made (them) carry hoe(s and) imposed (on them the carrying of) basket(s). I finished the work on th(at) unfinished temple. I roofed it with broad beams (and) installed tall doors in its gates. I made that temple shine like the sun and made (it) as bright as day for the god Ninurta, my lord.
Any king in the future, either a son or grandson who comes after me, whom the god Marduk names for dominion over the land: Do not set your heart on feats of might and power, (but rather) be assiduous towards the shrines of the gods Nabû and Marduk so that they may kill your opponent(s). (35) The god Marduk, my lord, examines the mouth (and) observes the heart (so) whoever is true to the god Bēl (Marduk) his foundations will endure (and) whoever is true to the god Son-of-Bēl (Nabû) will live for ever.
When that temple becomes dilapidated and you repair its dilapidated section(s), find an inscription (written) in my name (and) place (it) with your inscribed objects. By the command of the god Marduk, the great lord whose command cannot be changed, may the fame of your name be established for ever.
For the god Marduk, his lord: Nabopolassar, king of Babylon, surrounded the wall of Babylon on the outside with an embankment of baked bricks. O embankment, speak favorable things about him to the god Marduk.
For the god Marduk, his lord: Nabopolassar, king of Babylon, protégé of the gods Nabû and Marduk, surrounded the wall of Babylon on the outside with an embankment of baked bricks. O embankment, speak favorable things about him to the god Marduk.
Nabopolassar, king of Babylon, protégé of the gods Nabû and Marduk, the one who provides for Esagil and Babylon, the one who built the embankment of the Araḫtu canal for the god Marduk, his lord. O embankment, speak favorable things about him to the god Marduk.
Nabopolassar, king of Babylon, governor of the land of Sumer and Akkad, the one who makes the foundations of the land firm, I:
When the god Marduk, the great lord, gave me the land and people to rule, (10) he commanded me to plunder the land of my enemy.
At that time, I built Etemenanki anew and restored (it) to its (proper) place.
Nabopolassar, king of Babylon, protégé of the gods Nabû and Marduk, I:
When the god Marduk, the great lord, issued his important order to me to provide for cult centers (and) renovate shrines, (i 10) at that time, (with regard to) Sippar, the exalted, beloved cult center of the god Šamaš and the goddess Aya, the Euphrates River withdrew from it and (its) waters had become too distant to draw (water from it).
As for me, Nabopolassar, the humble (and) respectful one who reveres the gods, (ii 5) I had the Euphrates River dug to Sippar and (thereby) I firmly established an abundance of pure water for the god Šamaš, my lord.
I firmly secured the bank of that river with bitumen and baked bricks and (thereby) provided the god Šamaš, my lord, with a secure embankment.
Nabopolassar, strong king, king of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, the one who makes the foundations of the land firm, pious prince, protégé of the gods Nabû and Marduk, favorite of the god Šaššu (Šamaš), (i 10) beloved of the goddess Aya, the warrior of warriors whom the awesome god Erra allowed to attain his desire, the humble (and) respectful one who is assiduous towards the rites of the great gods, the king whose deeds surpass those of the kings, his ancestors, I:
When the god Šaššu (Šamaš), the great lord, came to my side and (ii 1) I killed the Subarean (Assyrian) and turned the land of my enemy into a mound of ruins (lit. “a mound and ruins”), (ii 5) at that time, I built anew Eʾedinna, the temple where she (lit. “he”) can relax, for the Divine Lady of Sippar — the exalted princess, my lady — and made (it) as bright as day.
On account of this, O Divine Lady of Sippar, supreme lady, whenever I complete this temple and (ii 15) you take up residence inside it, for me — Nabopolassar, the king who provides for you — prolong (my) kingship until the distant future like the bricks of Sippar and Babylon, which are firmly in place for eternity.
Nabopolassar, king of Babylon, protégé of ..., all directions ...
(No translation possible)
Amēl-Marduk, king of Babylon, the one who renovates Esagil and Ezida, son of Nebuchadnezzar (II), king of Babylon.
Palace of Amēl-Marduk, king of Babylon, heir of Nebuchadnezzar (II), king of Babylon.
One qa.
Palace of Amēl-Marduk.
One seah, six and a half akalu belonging to the palace of Amēl-Marduk, the king.
Two qa, (...).
Palace of Amēl-Marduk, king of Babylon, son of Nebuchadnezzar (II), king of Babylon.
Three and one-third akalu.
Palace of Amēl-Marduk, king of Babylon, son of Nebuchadnezzar (II), king of Babylon.
Neriglissar, king of Babylon, pious prince, the favorite of the god Marduk, the humble (and) submissive one who reveres the lord of lords, the wise (and) pious one, the one who is assiduous towards the shrines of the god Nabû — his lord — the ruler who provides, the one who brings large gifts to Esagil and Ezida, the one who copiously supplies sattukku-offerings (i 10) (and) ensures that their purification rites are carried out correctly, son of Bēl-šum-iškun — wise prince — the perfect young man, the one who ensures the protection of Esagil and Babylon, the one who protects the approach to the country like a strong wall, I.
When the god Marduk, the Enlil of the gods, the prince who deliberates, the sage who knows the hearts of all of the Igīgū gods, sought me out among the widespread people and properly provided for me since my youth, (i 20) he gave me an appropriate name (and) constantly guided me in places of well-being and health. For my righteousness, with which I always answer him, (and) for my submissiveness, through which I constantly seek respect for his divinity, I plan daily to perform that which is pleasing to him.
He looked upon me and declared (my) gracious name to be king in the land. In order to shepherd the people for eternity, (i 30) he gave to me for my kingship a just scepter that widens the land; for (my) lordship, he entrusted me with a legitimate rod that protects the people, made my hands grasps a staff that subdues enemies, (and) made me wear a legitimate crown, and (therefore) I did not tolerate the existence of rivals or intimidators to my kingship. I killed foes, slaughtered enemies, (ii 1) (and) suppressed all of the unsubmissive. I constantly established justice in the land (and) peacefully shepherded my widespread people.
At that time, I gave reverent attention to god Marduk, the god who creates wisdom, whose word is supreme among the lgīgū gods, whose lordship is the most outstanding among the Anunnakū gods.
(As for) the enclosure wall of Esagil that faces north, (an area) in which ramku- (and) kiništu-priests of Esagil reside, whose foundations a former king had laid but had not raised its superstructure, which had become progressively lower due to terracing, (ii 15) its walls became weak, its construction was no longer very stable, (and) its door-jamb(s) were not secure. To carry out bursaggu-offerings in a pure manner, to arrange purification rites, (ii 20) to keep taklīmu-offerings pure for the great lord, the god Marduk, and to properly administer sattukku-offerings, so that no omission or negligence occurs, I examined (and) inspected its original foundation and (then) I secured its (new) foundations on its original foundations. I raised its high parts, making (them) as lofty as a mountain. (ii 25) I secured its door-jamb(s) and set up doors in its gates. I surrounded (it) with a strong base using bitumen and baked bricks.
O Marduk, supreme lord, the pre-eminent one, the exalted one, the venerated one, the magnificent one, the light of the gods — his fathers — joyfully look upon my precious handiwork and give to me as a gift a life of long days, the attainment of very old age, a firmly secured throne, and a long-lasting dynasty!
Through your firm command, which cannot be altered, I am Neriglissar, the king who provides (and) the one who is assiduous towards your shrines for eternity.
Neriglissar, king of Babylon, whom the god Marduk — the great lord (and) the god who created him — selected in his steadfast heart and (then) bestowed to him a widespread people and entrusted him with shepherding the black-headed (people); in whose hands the god Nabû — the one who is entrusted with the entirety of the heavens and netherworld — (i 10) let grasp a just scepter (and) legitimate rod for making (his) subjects prosper; to whom the god Erra — the majestic one of the gods — gave his weapon(s) to kill enemies (and) conquer foes; whom the great gods in their assembly to pronounced to act as the one who provides for them by taking care of Esagil, Ezida, and Emeslam — the exalted cult centers — (and) ... of the gods of Babylon; Neriglissar, king of Babylon, < I>.
When the god Marduk, the great lord, ... an abundance of water in full spate, by the will of the deity Ninšiga and through the wisdom granted by the god Ea, with the competence provided by the god Marduk, (i 25) (and) the choice decision of the god Šamaš, he makes me successful; former ..., to/for Borsipa, Ezida, the bīt-guršu, ... very plentiful gifts (and) offerings they entrust (to me) ... I provide for Esagil and Ezida, (and) (i 30) keep shrines of the gods in good order. I made inscriptions (written) in my name (and) placed (them) inside them (the shrines).
At that time, Libil-ḫegalla, the eastern canal of Babylon, which a former king had had dug, but had not constructed its bank with bitumen and baked bricks: I had the canal (re)dug and I (properly re)constructed its bank and (thereby) I amassed an abundance of water that does not cease in the land. (ii 1) As for me, the wise (and) pious one, the king who knows how to revere the gods, I had Libil-ḫegalla (re)dug so that a plentitude of water can enter the land and I (re)constructed its bank. I firmly established inside it an abundance of water that does not cease.
... reside in Babylon, in which I poured out an abundance of water, (ii 10) ... goodness in their hearts ... Neriglissar, king of Agade, ... the god Mār-bīti ... legitimate ..., in an earlier time, in his heart ... (ii 15) ... an everlasting abundance of water, in ...
By the command of the god Marduk, king of the gods, the god who created me, and the god Erra, the warrior of warriors, (...) (ii 20) ... his morning (meal), the day of ... ... ... may ... be firmly in place and ... good things before you. ... shepherdship; may he kill his enemies; may his appearance shine (ii 30) so that the black-headed (people) are happy (about it) like the moon when rising (and) the sun while shining; ... the god Nabû ... the kings of the regions of the entire inhabited world, who sit on ... strong ... for ... may (it/they) be placed in your mouth. For eternity ...
Collated.
Neriglissar, king of Babylon, the one who renovates Esagil and Ezida, the one who performs good deeds, about whom the great gods made a decision for exercising his everlasting kingship, whose fate the god Marduk — the foremost of the gods, the one who decrees fates — determined to exercise authority over the lands, (i 10) in whose hands the god Nabû — the legitimate heir — let grasp a just scepter to perform the rôle of shepherd of the black-headed (people), to whom the god Erra — the majestic one of the gods — gave his weapon(s) to save the people (and) spare the land, son of Bēl-šum-iškun — king of Babylon — I.
When the god Marduk, great lord, elevated me (and) gave me the land and people to rule, I myself was constantly present (and) incessant towards Marduk. I provide for Esagil and Ezida, keep shrines in good order, (and) constantly seek original rites.
(As for) the copper mušḫuššu-dragon(s), which are always stationed at the bases of the gates of Esagil together with the silver wild bull(s) of the door-jambs, a former king did not station (them) in (the gates) Ka-Utu-e, Ka-Lamma-arabi, Ka-ḫegal, and Ka-ude-babbar. (i 25) As for me, the humble (and) respectful one who knows how to revere the gods, I cast eight fierce mušḫuššu-dragons of copper that rain down deadly venom on evil doer(s) and enem(ies), covered (them) with a plating of shining silver, and (i 30) stationed (them) on pedestal(s) in (the gates) Ka-Utu-e, Ka-Lamma-arabi, Ka-ḫegal, and Ka-ude-<babbar>, at the bases of those gates, as in the past, together with the silver wild bull(s) of the door-jambs, according to its original appearance.
(As for) the Dais of Destinies, which is inside Ezida, on which the god Nabû — the triumphant heir — takes up residence at the New Year, at the beginning of the year, during the akītu-festival, (during) the setting out of the Enlil of the gods — the god Marduk — the god Nabû — the legitimate heir — goes in procession into Šuanna (Babylon), on the fifth (and) eleventh days, when going and returning from Babylon, whose structure a former king had cast with silver, I covered it with shining gold (and) ornaments of brilliance.
(As for) the Euphrates River, the river of abundance, whose waters since its creation have flowed in full spate directly beside Esagil, (but) whose waters had withdrawn from the side of Esagil (and) had become too distant to draw (water from it) during the reign of a former king, (but as for) me, I sought out its original location and directed the course of its water beside Esagil, as in the past.
(As for) the eastern canal, which a former king had had dug, but had not constructed its bank, I had the canal (re)dug and (properly re)constructed its bank with bitumen and baked bricks. I firmly established for the land an abundance of water that does not cease.
I am constantly incessant towards Esagil and Ezida, (and) constantly seek to provision all of the cult-centers of the gods.
At that time, the palace, the residence of my royal majesty, which is in the Ka-dingirra district — which is in Babylon, from Ay-ibūr-šabû, the street of Babylon, to the bank of the Euphrates River — which a former king had built and whose door-jamb(s) he had installed (ii 20) inside (it): On the outside, the palatial hall over the bank of the Euphrates River collapsed and its brickwork had fallen apart. I removed its collapsed walls until I reached the level of the water. With bitumen and baked bricks, I firmly secured its base against water, and (then) built (it), completed (it), and raised its superstructure. I spread out strong cedar(s) to be its šīpu (s), architrave(s), and roof.
O Marduk, the great lord, the Enlil of the gods, the resplendent one, the light of the gods — his fathers — by your exalted command, which cannot be altered, may I be sated with the charms of the palace that I built; (ii 35) may I reach extreme old age (and) attain very old age inside it; may I receive inside it, from the horizon to the zenith, wherever the sun rises, substantial tribute from the kings of the regions of the entire inhabited world; (and) inside it may my descendants rule over the black-headed (people) forever.
Neriglissar, king of Babylon, the one who renovates Esagil and Ezida, the one who performs good deeds.
Neriglissar, king of Babylon, pious prince, the desire of the god Marduk’s heart, exalted ruler, beloved of the god Nabû, the one who deliberates and acquires wisdom, the one who is always (lit.: “without ceasing”) mindful of provisioning Esagil, Ezida, and Emeslam — the cult centers of the great gods — ... ... ... ... ...
... the god Šamaš ... extended his favorable protection over my army. Through pronouncement and divination, the god Šamaš (...) spoke unequivocally ... I gave reverent attention.
During the beginning of my gracious kingship, the ziggurrat of Sippar, which a former king had built and whose brickwork rains and downpours carried away, (which) a king of the past restored, put its brickwork in good order, rebuilt its dilapidated section(s), constructed (it to a height of) twenty-two cubits, but did not complete its superstructure:
As for me, the wise (and) pious one who knows how to revere the gods, through the wisdom that the god Ea gave to me, for the god Šamaš ...
... in a pronouncement ....
... Ezida ...
... which a king of the past had built and ... its walls — which a for mer king had restored but did not pro perly adorn its structure — a long time ago became weak, collapsed, and heavy rains and downpours carried away its walls.
The god Šamaš, the exalted judge, prompted me to renovate it. I put its brickwork in good order, rebuilt its dilapidated section(s), and ...
wise prince, the one who daily through the support of his gods constantly seeks respect for the god Marduk — the great lord — and the god Nabû — his true heir — the one who seeks to copiously supply sattu kku-offerings (...) to Esagil and Ezida (and) to perform daily that which is pleasing to the gods Nabû and Marduk, his lords, (i 10ˊ), the one who fulfills their command, son of Bēl-šum-iškun — wise prince (...) — the perfect young man, the valiant young man, (...).
When the god Nabû, the exalted vizier, the one who speaks about my good de eds, spread word of my good deeds (and) elevated the head of my royal majesty, he looked upon me with his gracious face and granted to me a just reign.
At his exalted command, I travelled enemy road(s), ... mountain path(s), ... lands ... ... ... hostile ... (i 25ˊ) ... ... king ...
Two qa, one half akalu.
(Palace of) Neriglissar, king of Babylon.
When the god Marduk, the king of all of heaven and earth, ... who lays to waste his ... ... through his ..., ... broad in intelligence, ... ..., the one who inspects the (four) quarters (of the world), ..., his eldest offspring (Belshazzar), a lowly person, was installed as the ruler of his land, ... he caused ..., a replica, to be set up over them. (5) He built a replica of Esagil and ... for (the city) Ur and the rest of the cult-center(s).
Daily, he devised cultic rites that were not befitting them, impure food offerings, ..., disrespectful ... and, as a spiteful act, he brought sattukku-offering to a halt, interfered with pelludû-rites (and) established ... inside cult-centers. Reverence for the god Marduk, the king of the gods, came to an end in his mind. Daily, he was performing evil deeds against his city (Babylon); ... ... his people, he brought ruin on all of them with an unrelenting yoke.
The Enlil of the gods became furiously angry at their complaints and ... their territory. The gods living inside them abandoned their shrines, angry that he had made (them) enter Šuanna (Babylon). The god Marduk, the exalted one, the Enlil of the gods, relented; his (hostile) attitude changed towards all of the inhabited settlements whose dwellings were in ruins and the people of the land of Sumer and Akkad who had become like corpses; he became forgiving.
He (Marduk) inspected (and) examined all of the lands, everyone of them, and constantly sought out a righteous king, the desire of his heart. He took Cyrus (II), the king of Anšan, into his hand, called (him) by his name, (and) proclaimed him (lit. “his name”) to be the ruler of the entirety of everything. He made the land of the Gutians (and) all of the Umman-manda (Medes) bow down at his feet. (As for) the black-headed people whom he allowed his hand to conquer, he was assiduous towards their welfare in truth and justice. The god Marduk, the great lord, the one who nurtures his people, looked with pleasure upon his good deeds and righteous heart.
He (Marduk) commanded that he (Cyrus) should march against his city, Babylon. He made him take the road to Babylon and, like a friend and companion, he marched at his side. His widespread troops, whose number, like the water of a river, cannot be ascertained, marched fully armed at his side. Without a fight or battle, he allowed him to enter Šuanna (Babylon). He saved his city, Babylon, from hardship. He delivered Nabonidus, the king who did not revere him, into his hands.
The people of Babylon, all of them, the entirety of the land of Sumer and Akkad, (as well as) the nobles and governors, bowed down before him (and) kissed his feet. They were happy at him being king (and) their faces shone. (As for) the lord, who through his (Marduk’s) support revived the dying (and) universally spared (them) from trouble and hardship, they graciously blessed him (and) praised his name.
I, Cyrus (II), king of the world, great king, strong king, king of Babylon, king of the land of Sumer and Akkad, king of the four quarters (of the world), son of Cambyses (I) — great king, king of Anšan — grandson of Cyrus (I) — great king, king of Anšan — descendant of Teispes — great king, king of Anšan — the eternal seed of kingship, whose reign the gods Bēl (Marduk) and Nabû love and whose kingship they desired to their heart’s content. When I peacefully entered into Babylon, amidst joy and happiness, I took up (my) lordly residence in the palace of the ruler.
The god Marduk, the great lord, established for me as (my) destiny the great magnanimity of one who loves Babylon and daily I strive to revere him. My widespread troops marched peacefully inside Babylon. I did not allow the whole of the land of Sumer and Akkad to have troublemakers. I sought out the welfare of the city of Babylon and all of its shrines. (As for) the citizens of Babylon, ..., who would have endured a yoke not befitting them if not for the will of god, I allowed (them) to find rest for their exhaustion (and) I relieved (them) off their ...
The god Marduk, the great lord, was pleased with my good deeds and he kindly pronounced a blessing over me – Cyrus (II), the king who reveres him — and Cambyses (II) — the son, my offspring — and the entirety of my army so that we, at his exalted command, could constantly walk about happily before him in good health. All of the kings who sit on (royal) daises, from every quarter (of the world), from the Upper Sea to the Lower Sea, those who live in remote regions, (and) the kings of the land of Amurru who live in tents, everyone of them, brought their substantial tribute inside Šuanna (Babylon) (and) kissed my feet.
From Šuanna (Babylon) to Aššur and Susa, Agade, Ešnunna, Zamban, Mê-Turān, Dēr, as far as the border of the land of the Gutians, (and) cult-centers on the opposite side of the Tigris River whose dwellings had previous been in ruins — I returned the deities who live inside them to their (proper) places and I made (them) reside in (their) eternal dwelling(s). I gathered (together) all of their people and returned (them to) their settlements.
Moreover, (as for) the deities of the land of Sumer and Akkad who Nabonidus, incurring the wrath of the lord of the gods (Marduk), had brought into Šuanna (Babylon), at the command of the god Marduk, the great lord, I allowed (them) to live in peace in their abodes, (in) the dwelling(s) of (their) heart’s content. May all of the deities whom I made enter into their cult-centers speak daily about my life being long (and) may they mention favorable words about me in the presence of the gods Bēl (Marduk) and Nabû. Furthermore, may they say this to the god Marduk, my lord: “ (As for) the ... of Cyrus (II), the king who reveres you, and Cambyses (II), his son, ... may they be the ones who provision our shrines until distant days.” Also, the people of Babylon blessed (my) kingship. I allowed the lands, all of them, to live undisturbed.
Daily, I lavishly provided ... geese, two ducks, and ten pigeons, more than the geese, ducks, and pigeons ....
(As for) Imgur-Enlil, the great wall of Babylon, I sought to strengthen its defenses and ... the quay (made) of baked brick on the bank of the moat that a previous king had built, but not completed, I ... its construction. (As for) ..., which did not surround the city on the outside, which no previous king had built, his troops, the levy of his land, into Šuanna (Babylon) ... I built anew with bitumen and baked brick and completed their construction.
... tall doors of cedar covered with bronze. Wherever their gates were, I installed thresholds and fittings of cast copper.
... I saw a ... written in the name of Ashurbanipal, a king who came before me, that (had been deposited) inside it. ... to its place.
O Marduk, the great lord, grant me a life (lasting until) distant days, the attainment of very old age, the securing of (my) throne, and the prolongation of (my) reign as a gift. Furthermore, may I ... in your heart for ever.
Written and collated from a .... Tablet of Qīšti-Marduk, son of ....
Cyrus (II), king of the world, king of the land Anšan, the son of Cambyses (I): The great gods placed in my hands all of the lands (and) I allowed the land to live undisturbed.
Cyrus (II), king of the lands, the one who loves Esagil and Ezida, the son of Cambyses (I), strong king, I.
